JOHN E, SARNQ, M.D
author of Mind Over Back Pain
HEALING
BACK PAIN
The Mind-Body Connection
§
WITHOUT DRUGS • WITHOUT SURGERY
DC
HIz
(X
I
WITHOUT EXERCISE
BACK PAIN CAN BE STOPPED FOREVER

WHAT DR. SARNO
TELLS HIS TMS PATIENTS:
Resume physical activity. It won't hurt you.
Talk to your brain:
tell
it you won't take it anymore.
Stop all physical treatments for your back—they may be
blocking your recovery.
DONT:
Repress your anger or emotions—they can give you a
pain in the back.
Think of yourself as being injured. Psychological
conditioning contributes to ongoing back pain.
Be intimidated by back pain. You have the power to
overcome
it.
HEALING BACK PAIN
Using the actual case histories of his own patients, Dr. John
Sarno shows why tension and unexpressed emotions—partic-
ularly anger—cause chronic back pain, and how awareness and
understanding are the first steps to doing something about it.

ALSO BY JOHN E. SARNO, M.D.
Mind Over Back Pain

HEALING
BACK PAIN
The Mind-Body Connection
JOHN E. SARNO, M.D.
o
WVrtNER BOOKS
A Time Warner Company

Excerpts from "Pity me not because the light of day" by Edna St. Vincent Millay.
From Collected Sonnets, Revised and Expanded Edition, Harper & Row, 1988. Copy-
right 1923, 1951 by Edna St. Vincent Millay and Norma Millay Ellis. Reprinted by
permission of Elizabeth Barnett, Literary Executor.
This book
is not intended as a substitute for the medical advice of physicians. The
reader should regularly consult a physician in matters relating to his/her health and
particularly with respect to any symptoms that may require diagnosis or medical
attention.
This book contains many references to actual cases the author has encountered over
the years. However, names and other identifying characteristics have been changed
to protect the privacy of those involved.
Copyright © 1991 by John E. Sarno, M.D.
All rights reserved.
Warner Books, Inc., 1271 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10020
f^ A Time Warner Company
Printed in the United States of America
First printing: February 1991
13
15
17
19
20
18
16
14
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Sarno, John E., 1923-
Healing back pain
: the mind-body connection / John E. Sarno.
p.
cm.
"Successor to Mind over back pain, published in 1984"—OP introd.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-446-39230-8
1.
Backache—Psychological aspects.
2. Neck pain—Psychological
aspects.
3. Mind and body.
I.
Tide.
RD771.B217S27
1991
617.5'64—dc20
90-44949
CIP
Book Design: Giorgetta Bell McRee
Cover Design: Anne Twomey
Cover Photo: Superstock

Contents
INTRODUCTION
Vll
1. The Manifestations of TMS
1
2. The Psychology of TMS
29
3. The Physiology of TMS
59
4. The Treatment of TMS
70
5. The Traditional (Conventional) Diagnoses
97
6. The Traditional (Conventional) Treatments
120
7. Mind and Body
132
appendix: Letters from Patients
170
INDEX
185

If you purchase this book without a cover you should be aware that
this book may have been stolen property and reported as "unsold
and destroyed" to the publisher. In such case neither the author nor
the publisher have received any payment for this "stripped book."

Introduction
This book is the successor to Mind Over Back Pain, which was
published in 1984. It described a medical disorder known as
the Tension Myositis Syndrome (TMS), which
I have had
reason to believe is the major cause of the common syndromes
ofpain involving the neck, shoulders, back, buttocks and limbs.
In the years since that first publication I have further developed
and clarified my concepts about how to diagnose and treat
TMS, hence the necessity for this book.
Over the years the increasing incidence of these pain syn-
dromes has created a public health problem of impressive pro-
portions. One continues to see the statistic that somewhere
around 80 percent of the population have a history of one of
these painful conditions. An article in Forbes magazine in Au-
gust 1986 reported that $56 billion are spent annually to deal
with the consequences of this ubiquitous medical disorder. It
is the
first cause of worker absenteeism in this country and
ranks second behind respiratory infections as a reason for a
doctor visit.
All this has happened in the past thirty years. Why? After
a few million years of evolution, has the American back sud-
denly become incompetent? Why are so many people prone
vtt

viii
Introduction
to back injury? And why has the medical profession proven
so helpless to stem the epidemic?
It
is this book's purpose to answer those and many other
questions about this widespread problem. The thesis will be
advanced that, like all epidemics, this one is the result of med-
icine's failure to recognize the nature of the disease, that is, to
make an accurate diagnosis. The plague ravaged the world
because no one knew anything about bacteriology or epide-
miology at the time.
It may be hard to believe that highly
sophisticated
twentieth-century
medicine
cannot
properly
identify the cause ofsomething so simple and common as these
pain disorders but physicians and medical researchers are, after
all, still human and, therefore, not all-knowing and, most im-
portant, subject to the enduring weakness of bias.
The pertinent
bias here
is that these common pain syn-
dromes must be the result of structural abnormalities of the
spine or chemically or mechanically induced deficiencies of
muscle. Of equal importance
is another bias held by conven-
tional medicine
that emotions do not
induce
physiologic
change. Experience with TMS contradicts both biases. The
disorder
is a benign (though painful) physiologic aberration
of soft tissue (not the spine), and it is caused by an emotional
process.
I
first appreciated the magnitude of this problem in 1965
when I joined the staff of what is now known as the Howard
A. Rusk Institute of Rehabilitation Medicine
at New York
University Medical Center as director of outpatient services.
It was my first introduction to large numbers of patients with
neck, shoulder, back and buttock pain. Conventional medical
training had taught me that these pains were primarily due to
a variety of structural abnormalities of the spine, most com-
monly
arthritic and disc disorders, or to a vague group of
muscle conditions attributed to poor posture, underexercise,
overexertion and the
like. Pain in the legs or arms was pre-
sumed due to compression (pinching) of nerves. However, it

Introduction
ix
was not at all clear how these abnormalities actually produced
the pain.
The rationale for the treatment prescribed was equally per-
plexing. Treatment included injections, deep heat in the form
of ultrasound, massage and exercise. No one was sure what
these regimens were supposed to do but they seemed to help
in some cases.
It was said that the exercise strengthened the
abdominal and back muscles and that this somehow supported
the spine and prevented pain.
The experience of treating these patients was frustrating and
depressing; one could never predict the outcome. Further,
it
was troubling to realize that the pattern of pain and physical
examination findings often did not correlate with the presumed
reason for the pain. For example, pain might be attributed to
degenerative arthritic changes at the lower end of the spine
but the patient might have pain in places that had nothing to
do with the bones in that area. Or someone might have a
lumbar disc that was herniated to the left and have pain in the
right leg.
Along with doubt about the accuracy of conventional di-
agnoses there came the realization that the primary tissue in-
volved was
muscle,
specifically
the
muscles
of the
neck,
shoulders, back and buttocks. But even more important was
the observation that 88 percent ofthe people seen had histories
of such things
as tension or migraine headache, heartburn,
hiatus hernia, stomach
ulcer,
colitis,
spastic colon,
irritable
bowel syndrome, hay fever, asthma, eczema and a variety of
other disorders, all of which were strongly suspected of being
related to tension.
It seemed logical to conclude that their
painful muscle condition might also be induced by tension.
Hence, the Tension Myositis Syndrome (TMS). (Myo means
"muscle"; Tension Myositis Syndrome is defined here as a change
of state in the muscle that is painful.)
When that theory was put to the
test and patients were
treated accordingly, there was an improvement in treatment
results. In fact,
it was then possible to predict with some ac-

x
Introduction
curacy which patients would do well and which would prob-
ably
fail.
That was
the
beginning of the
diagnostic and
therapeutic program described in this book.
It should be emphasized that this book does not describe a
"new approach" to the treatment of back pain. TMS is a new
diagnosis and, therefore, must be treated in a manner appro-
priate to the diagnosis. When medicine learned that bacteria
were the cause of many infections,
it looked for ways to deal
with germs—hence the antibiotics.
If emotional factors are
responsible for someone's back pain one must look for a proper
therapeutic technique. Clearly, there is no logic to traditional
physical treatment. Instead experience has shown that the only
successful and permanent way to treat the problem is by teach-
ing patients to understand what they have. To the uninitiated
that may not make much sense but it should become clear as
one reads on.
Is this holistic medicine? Unfortunately, what has come to
be known as holistic medicine is a jumble of science, pseudo-
science and folklore. Anything which
is outside mainstream
medicine may be accepted
as
holistic, but more
accurately
described, the predominant idea
is that one must treat the
"whole person," a wise concept that is generally neglected by
contemporary medicine. But that should not give license to
identify anything as holistic that defies medical convention.
Perhaps
holistic should be defined
as that which includes
consideration of both the emotional and structural aspects of
health and
illness. In accepting this definition one does not
reject the scientific method. On the contrary,
it becomes in-
creasingly important to require proof and replication of results
when one adds the very difficult emotional dimension to the
medical equation.
Therefore,
this
is not holistic medicine
as
it
is popularly
conceived. I hope it is an example ofgood medicine—accurate
diagnosis and effective treatment, and good science—conclu-
sions based on observation, verified by experience. Though
the cause ofTMS is tension, the diagnosis is made on physical

Introduction
xi
and not psychological grounds, in the tradition of clinical med-
icine.
All physicians should be practitioners of "holistic medicine"
in the sense that they recognize the interaction between mind
and body. To leave the emotional dimension out of the study
of health and illness is poor medicine and poor science.
There is an important point to be emphasized: Though TMS
is induced by emotional phenomena, it is a physical disorder.
It must be diagnosed by a physician, someone who is capable
of recognizing both the physical and psychological dimensions
of the
condition.
Psychologists may suspect
that
patients'
symptoms are emotionally induced but, not trained in physical
diagnosis, cannot say with certainty that they have TMS. Since
very few physicians are trained to recognize a disorder whose
roots are psychological, TMS
falls between the cracks, as
it
were, and patients go undiagnosed. It is particularly important
that the diagnosis be made by a physician to avoid the pejor-
ative conclusion that the pain is "all in the head."
What do doctors think of this diagnosis? It is unlikely that
most physicians are aware of it.
I have written a number of
medical papers and chapters for textbooks on the subject but
they have reached a limited medical audience, primarily phy-
sicians working in the field of physical medicine and rehabil-
itation.
In
recent
years
it has become impossible
to have
medical papers on TMS accepted for publication, undoubtedly
because these concepts fly in the face of contemporary medical
dogma. For those physicians who might see this book, I would
point out that
it
is more complete than any of the papers
I
have published and will be useful to them despite the fact that
it is written for a general audience.
Judging by the reactions of doctors in my immediate en-
vironment, most physicians
will either ignore or
reject the
diagnosis. A few doctors in my own specialty say that they see
the validity of the diagnosis but find
it difficult to treat such
patients. One hopes that the younger generation of physicians
will be more capable of dealing with this kind of problem. It

xii
Introduction
is one of the intentions of this book to reach those young
doctors.
What of those readers who are having neck, shoulder, back
or buttock pain and think they may have TMS? A book cannot
substitute for a doctor and it is not my intention to diagnose
and treat through this book.
I consider
it unethical and im-
moral to hold oneself out as a physician through a book or a
videocassette. Pain syndromes must always be properly studied
to
rule out serious disorders such
as cancer, tumors, bone
disease and many other conditions. If one has persistent pain
anywhere,
it is imperative to see a doctor so that appropriate
examinations and tests can be done.
The primary purpose of this book is to raise consciousness
both inside and outside the field of medicine, because these
common pain syndromes represent a major public health prob-
lem that will not be solved until there is a change in the medical
perception of their cause.
Having stated the purpose of the book, I would be less than
candid if I did not report that many readers of its predecessor,
Mind Over Back Pain^ reported amelioration or complete res-
olution of symptoms. This
substantiates the idea that
it
is
identification with and knowledge of the disorder which are
the critical therapeutic factors.
Science requires that all new ideas be validated by experience
and replication. Before new concepts can be generally accepted
they must be proven beyond all doubt. It is essential that the
ideas advanced in this book be subjected to research study. In
the tradition of scientific medicine
I invite my colleagues to
verify or correct my work. What they ought not do is ignore
it, for the problem of back pain is too great and the need for
a solution imperative.

HEALING
BACK PAIN

1
The Manifestations
of TMS
I have never seen a patient with pain in the neck, shoulders,
back or buttocks who didn't believe that the pain was due to
an injury, a "hurt" brought on by some physical activity. "I
hurt myself while running (playing basketball, tennis, bowl-
ing)." "The pain started after I lifted my little girl" or "when
I tried to open a stuck window." 'Ten years ago I was involved
in a hit-from-behind auto accident and
I have had recurrent
back pain ever since."
The idea that pain means injury or damage
is deeply in-
grained in the American consciousness. Of course, if the pain
starts while one
is engaged in a physical activity
it's difficult
not to attribute the pain to the activity. (As we shall see later,
that is often deceiving.) But this pervasive concept of the vul-
nerability of the back, of ease of injury, is nothing less than a
medical catastrophe for the American public, which now has
an army of semidisabled men and women whose
lives
are
significandy restricted by the fear of doing further damage or
bringing on the dreaded pain again. One often hears, "I'm
afraid of hurting myself again so I'm going to be very careful
of what I do."
In good
faith, this idea has been fostered by the medical

2
Heeding Back Pain
profession and other healers for years.
It has been assumed
that neck, shoulder, back and buttock pain is due to injury or
disease of the spine and associated structures or incompetence
of muscles and ligaments surrounding these structures—with-
out scientific validation of these diagnostic concepts.
On the other hand,
I have had gratifying success
in the
treatment of these disorders for seventeen years based on a
very different diagnosis. It has been my observation that the
majority of these pain syndromes are the result of a condition
in the muscles, nerves, tendons and ligaments brought on by
tension. And the point has been proven by the very high rate
of success achieved with a treatment program that is simple,
rapid and thorough.
Medicine's preoccupation with the
spine draws on
fun-
damental medical philosophy and training. Modern medicine
has been primarily mechanical and structural in orientation.
The body
is viewed as an exceedingly complex machine and
illness
as
a malfunction
in the machine brought about by
infection,
trauma,
inherited
defects,
degeneration
and,
of
course, cancer. At the same time medical science has had a
love affair with the laboratory, believing that nothing is valid
unless
it can be demonstrated in that arena. No one would
dispute the essential role the laboratory has played in medical
progress
(witness
penicillin and
insulin
for example). Un-
fortunately, some things
are
difficult to study in the labo-
ratory. One of these
is the mind and
its organ, the
brain.
The emotions do not lend themselves to test tube experiments
and measurement and so modern medical science has chosen
to ignore them, buttressed by the conviction that emotions
have
little to do with health and illness anyway. Hence, the
majority of practicing physicians do not consider that emo-
tions
play
a
significant
role
in
causing
physical
disorders,
though many would acknowledge that they might aggravate
a "physically" caused
illness. In general, physicians
feel un-
comfortable in dealing with a problem that
is related to the
emotions. They tend to make a sharp division between "the

The Manifestations ofTMS
3
things of the mind" and "the things of the body," and only
feel comfortable with the
latter.
Peptic ulcer of the duodenum is a good example. Although
some physicians would dispute the idea, there
is fairly wide
acceptance among practicing doctors that ulcers are caused
primarily by "tension." Contrary to logic, however, the major
focus in treatment is "medical," not "psychological," and drugs
are prescribed to neutralize or prevent the secretion of acid.
But failure to treat the primary cause of the disorder is poor
medicine;
it
is symptomatic treatment, something we were
warned about in medical school. But since most physicians see
their role only as treating the body, the psychological part of
the problem is neglected, even though it's the basic cause. In
fairness, some physicians make an attempt to say something
about tension, but it's often of a superficial nature like, "You
ought to take it easy; you're working too hard."
Pain syndromes look so "physical" it is particularly difficult
for doctors to consider the
possibility that they might be
caused by
psychological
factors, and so they
cling
to the
structural explanation. In doing so, however, they are chiefly
responsible
for
the
pain epidemic
that now
exists
in
this
country.
If structural abnormalities don't cause pain
in the neck,
shoulder, back and buttocks, what does? Studies and clinical
experience of many years suggest that these common pain
syndromes are the result of a physiologic alteration in certain
muscles, nerves, tendons and ligaments which
is called the
Tension Myositis Syndrome (TMS).
It is a harmless but po-
tentially very painful disorder that
is the
result of specific,
common emotional situations.
It
is the purpose of this book
to describe TMS in detail.
The ensuing sections of this chapter will discuss who gets
it, in what parts of the body it occurs, the various patterns of
pain and the overall impact of TMS on people's health and
daily lives. Following chapters will talk about the psychology
ofTMS (which is where it all begins), its physiology and how

4
Heeding Back Pain
it
is
treated. Conventional diagnosis and treatment will be
reviewed and I will conclude with a chapter on the important
interaction between mind and body in matters of health and
illness.
WHO GETS TMS?
One might almost say that TMS is a cradle-to-grave disorder
since it does occur in children, though probably not until the
age of five or six.
Its manifestation in children
is, of course,
different from what occurs in adults. I am convinced that what
are referred to as "growing pains" in children are manifesta-
tions of TMS.
The cause of "growing pains" has never been identified but
physicians have always been comfortable in reassuring mothers
that the condition is harmless. It occurred to me one day while
listening to a young mother describe her daughter's severe leg
pain in the middle of the night that what the child had ex-
perienced was very much like an adult attack of sciatica, and
since this was clearly one of the most common manifestations
of TMS, "growing pains" might very well represent TMS in
children.
Little wonder that no one has been able to explain the nature
of"growing pains" since TMS is a condition that usually leaves
no physical evidence of its presence. There
is
a temporary
constriction of blood vessels, bringing on the symptoms, and
then all returns to normal.
The emotional stimulus for the attack in children is no dif-
ferent from that in adults—anxiety. One might say that the
attack in
a child
is a paranightmare.
It
is a substitute for a
nightmare, a command decision by the mind to produce a
physical reaction rather than have the individual experience
a painful emotion, which is what happens in adults as well.
At the other end of the spectrum, I have seen the syndrome
in men and women in their eighties. There appears to be no

The Manifestations ofTMS
5
age limit, and why would there be? As long as one can generate
emotions one is susceptible to the disorder.
What are the ages when
it
is most common, and can we
learn anything from those
statistics? In a follow-up survey
carried out in 1982, 177 patients were interviewed as to their
then current status following treatment for TMS. (See page
87 for results of the survey.) We learned that 77 percent of
the patients fell between the ages of thirty and sixty, 9 percent
were in their twenties, and there were only four teenagers (2
percent). At the other end of the spectrum, only 7 percent
were in their sixties and 4 percent in their seventies.
These statistics suggest very strongly that the cause of most
back pain is emotional, for the years between thirty and sixty
are the ages that
fall into what
I would call the years of re-
sponsibility. This is the period in one's life when one is under
the most strain to succeed, to provide and excel, and it is logical
that this
is when one would experience the highest incidence
of TMS.
Further,
if degenerative changes in the spine
(os-
teoarthritis, disc degeneration and herniation, facet arthrosis
and spinal stenosis, for instance) were a primary cause of back
pain, these statistics wouldn't fit at all. In that case, a gradual
increase in incidence from the twenties on would occur, with
the highest incidence in the oldest people. To be sure, this
is
only circumstantial evidence, but it is highly suggestive.
So the answer to the question "Who gets TMS?"
is "Any-
body." But
it
is certainly most common in the middle years
of life, the years of responsibility. Let's now take a look at how
TMS manifests itself.
WHERE DOES TMS MANIFEST ITSELF?
Muscle
The primary tissue involved in TMS is muscle, hence the orig-
inal name myositis
(as mentioned, myo stands for "muscle")

6
Heeding Back Fain
The only muscles in the body that are susceptible to TMS are
those in the back of the neck, the entire back, and the buttocks,
known collectively as postural muscles. They are so named
because they maintain the correct posture ofthe head and trunk
and contribute to the effective use of the arms.
Postural muscles have a higher proportion of "slow twitch"
muscle fibers than limb muscles, making them more efficient
for endurance
activity, which
is what
is required of them.
Whether or not this
is the reason why TMS
is restricted to
this group of muscles we do not know. It is possible, though,
since the muscles most frequently involved have the most im-
portant jobs. These are the buttock muscles, known anatom-
ically as gluteal muscles. Their job is to keep the trunk upright
on the legs, to prevent it from falling forward or to either side.
Statistically, the low back-buttock area is the most common
location for TMS.
Just above the buttocks are the lumbar muscles (in the small
of the back), often involved simultaneously with buttock mus-
cles. Occasionally the gluteal or lumbar muscles are affected
separately. Roughly two-thirds ofTMS patients will have their
major pain in this area.
Second in order of frequency of involvement are the neck
and shoulder muscles. The pain
is usually in the side of the
neck and the top of the
shoulder,
in the upper trapezius
muscle.
TMS can occur anywhere
else
in the back, between the
shoulders and low back, but does so far less frequendy than
in the two areas mentioned.
Generally a patient will complain of pain in one of these
prime areas,
as, for example, in the left buttock or the right
shoulder, but the physical examination will reveal something
else of great interest and importance. In virtually every patient
with TMS one finds tenderness when pressure is applied (pal-
pation) to muscles in three parts of the back: the outer aspect
of both buttocks (and sometimes to the entire buttock), the
muscles in the lumbar area and both upper trapezius (shoulder)

The Manifestations ofTMS
7
muscles. This consistent pattern
is important because
it sup-
ports the hypothesis that the pain syndrome originates in the
brain rather than in some structural abnormality of the spine
or incompetence of the muscle.
Nerve
The second type of tissue to be implicated in this syndrome
is
nerve,
specifically what
are known
as
peripheral
nerves.
Those most frequendy affected are located, as might be ex-
pected,
in close proximity to the muscles that are involved
most often.
The sciatic nerve is located deep in the buttock muscle (one
on each side); lumbar spinal nerves are under the lumbar para-
spinal muscles; the cervical spinal nerves and brachial plexus
are under the upper trapezius (shoulder) muscles. These are
the nerves most frequendy affected in TMS.
In fact, TMS looks like a regional process, rather than one
aimed at specific structures. So when it affects a given area, all
the tissues suffer oxygen deprivation so that one may experi-
ence both muscle and nerve pain.
Varying kinds of pain may result when muscle and/or nerve
are affected.
It may be sharp, aching, burning, shocklike, or
it may feel like pressure. In addition to pain, nerve involvement
may produce
feelings of pins and needles,
tingling and/or
numbness, and sometimes sensations of weakness in the legs
or arms. In some cases there
is measurable muscle weakness.
The latter can be documented with electromyographic studies
(EMG). EMG abnormalities
are often cited
as evidence of
nerve damage due to structural compression, but in fact EMG
changes are very common in TMS and usually reveal involve-
ment of many more nerves than could be explained by a struc-
tural abnormality.
Lumbar spinal and sciatic nerve symptoms are in the legs,
for that
is where those nerves are going. Involvement of cer-

8
Healing Back Pain
vical spinal nerves and brachial plexus cause symptoms in the
arms and hands. Traditional diagnoses attribute leg pain to
a herniated disc and arm pain to a "pinched nerve." (See chap-
ter 5.)
TMS may involve any of the nerves in the neck, shoulders,
back and buttocks, sometimes producing unusual pain pat-
terns. One of the most frightening
is chest pain. One imme-
diately thinks of the heart when there is chest pain and, indeed,
it is always important to be sure that there is nothing wrong
with that organ. Once having done so, one should keep in
mind that spinal nerves in the upper back may be suffering
mild oxygen deprivation because of TMS and that this may
be the source of the pain. These nerves serve the front of the
trunk as well as the back, hence the chest pain.
Remember: Always consult a regular physician in order to
rule out serious disorders. This book is not intended as a guide
to self-diagnosis.
Its purpose
is to describe a clinical entity,
TMS.
One may suspect the presence of nerve involvement in TMS
through the patient's history, the physical examination or both.
Sciatic pain may affect any part of the leg except the upper,
front thigh. There
is considerable
variability depending on
how much of the nerve trunk is affected by oxygen debt. As
noted above, the person may also complain of other strange
feelings and of weakness.
On physical examination the tendon
reflexes and muscle
strength are tested to determine whether oxygen deprivation
has irritated the nerve sufficiently to interfere with the trans-
mission of motor impulses. Similarly, sensory tests are done
(for example,
ability
to
feel
a
pinprick)
to determine
the
integrity of the
sensory
fibers
in
the
involved
nerve. The
major virtue of documenting sensory or motor deficits
is to
be able to discuss them with patients and reassure them that
feelings of weakness, numbness or tingling are quite harmless.
The so-called straight leg-raising test is always done when
a patient is examined, though for different reasons, depending

The Manifestations ofTMS
9
on the examiner.
If there
is a great deal of soreness in the
buttocks, the patient will be unable to elevate the straightened
leg very far and then only with a great deal of pain. The pain
may be due to the muscle, the sciatic nerve or both. What the
sign does not mean in the majority of cases
is that there
is a
herniated disc "pressing on the sciatic nerve," as patients are
often told.
When there
is
a shoulder-arm pain syndrome, one does
similar tests on the arm and hand.
Sometimes patients have pain on two sides;
this
is of no
particular significance. People will also often report that in
addition to having the major pain in the right buttock and
leg, for example, they have some intermittent pain in the neck
or one of the shoulders. This
is not unexpected since TMS
may involve any or all of the postural muscles.
Tendons and Ligaments
Following the publication of my first book describing TMS,
I gradually became aware that a variety of tendonalgias (pain
in tendons or ligaments) were probably part of the syndrome
of tension myositis. The term myositis was fast becoming ob-
solete, it having been determined many years before that nerves
could be implicated in TMS,
as just described. Now
I was
beginning to realize that still another type of tissue might be
part of the process; and as time went by this conclusion became
more and more inescapable.
What first attracted attention were reports from treated pa-
tients:
In addition to the disappearance of back pain, their
tendon pain (for example, tennis elbow) often left as well. As
is well known, tennis elbow
is one of the most common of
the disorders called tendonitis. Generally,
it
is assumed that
these painful tendons are inflamed, presumably because of ex-
cessive
activity. The routine treatment
is anti-inflammatory
medication and activity restriction.

10
Healing Back Fain
Having been
alerted to the
possibility that these painful
tendons might be part ofTMS, I began to suggest to patients
that their tendonitis might also disappear if they allowed it to
occupy the same place in their thinking as the back pain. The
results were encouraging and over time my confidence in the
diagnosis increased. I am now prepared to say that tendonalgia
is often an integral part ofTMS and in some cases is its primary
manifestation.
It has become apparent that the elbow is not the most com-
mon site of tendonalgia. In my experience, the knee has that
distinction. Some of the usual diagnoses for knee pain are
chondromalacia, unstable knee cap and trauma. However, the
examination discloses that there is tenderness of one or more
of the tendons and ligaments surrounding the knee joint and
the pain usually disappears along with the back pain.
Another common place is the foot and ankle, either the top
or bottom of the foot, or the Achilles tendon. Common foot
diagnoses are neuroma, bone spur, plantar
fasciitis,
flat feet
and trauma due to excessive physical activity.
The shoulder is another location for TMS tendonalgia; the
usual structural diagnosis
is bursitis or rotator cuff disorder.
Again, there is usually easily identified tenderness on palpation
of a tendon in the shoulder. Wrist tendons are not uncom-
monly involved.
It
is possible that what
is known as carpal
tunnel syndrome may also be part ofTMS but this cannot be
stated without further observation and study.
Recentiy I saw a patient who had developed pain in a new
location after a minor accident. She said the pain was in her
hip and that X rays showed that there was arthritis of the hip
joints, more on the side where she was having pain, and she
had been told that this was die cause of her pain. She had
proven to be highly susceptible to TMS in the past so I sug-
gested she come in for an examination. The X rays showed a
very modest amount of arthritic change in the joint in question,
about what would be expected in someone of her age. She
had excellent range of motion of the joint and no pain on

The Manifestations ofTMS
11
weight bearing or movement of the leg. When I asked her to
touch the exact spot where she felt the pain she identified a
small area where the tendon of a muscle attaches to bone, well
above the hip joint;
it was tender to pressure.
I told her
I
thought she had TMS tendonalgia and the pain left in a few
days.
Hip tendonalgia
is most commonly attributed to what
is
called trochanteric bursitis. That diagnosis was not made on
this occasion because the location of pain was above the tro-
chanter, the bony prominence that can be
felt at the upper,
outer aspect of the hip.
TMS can manifest itself in a variety of locations and it tends
to move around, particularly if something
is being done to
combat the disorder. Patients often report pain in a new lo-
cation as the old one gets better. It is as though the brain
is
unwilling to give up
this convenient strategy for diverting
attention away from the realm of the emotions. It is, therefore,
particularly important for the patient to know where
all the
possible locations of pain are. My patients are routinely in-
structed to call me when they develop new pain so that we
can determine whether it is part of TMS.
In summary, TMS involves three types of tissue: muscle,
nerve and tendon-ligaments. Let us now look at how TMS
manifests itself.
PATIENT CONCEPTS OF CAUSE AND TYPE
OF ONSET
When
first seen most people are under the impression that
they have been suffering from the long-term
results of an
injury,
a degenerative process,
a congenital abnormality or
some deficiency in the strength or flexibility of their muscles.
The idea of injury is probably the most pervasive. This often
ties in with the circumstances under which the pain begins.

12
Healing Back Pain
According
to
a
survey we
did
a number of years
ago,
40 percent of a typical group of patients reported that the pain
began in association with some kind of physical incident. For
some it was a minor automobile accident, usually the hit-from-
behind type.
Falls, on the ice or down steps, were common.
Lifting a heavy object or straining was another; and, ofcourse,
running,
tennis, golf or basketball were often blamed. The
pain began anywhere from minutes to hours or days after the
incident, raising some important questions about the nature
of the pain. Some of the reported incidents were trivial, such
as bending over to pick up a toothbrush or twisting to reach
into a cupboard, but the ensuing pain might be just as excru-
ciating as that experienced by someone who was trying to lift
a refrigerator.
I recall a young man who was sitting at his office desk writing
and experienced a spasm in his low back so severe and per-
sistent that he had to be taken home by ambulance. The next
forty-eight hours were agonizing; he couldn't move without
setting off a new wave of spasm.
How can such excruciating pain be
set off by this great
variety of physical incidents? In view of the different degrees
of severity of the physical incidents and the great variation in
when the pain begins after the incident, the conclusion is that
the physical happening was not the cause of the pain but was
merely a trigger. Many patients apparently don't need a trigger;
the pain just comes on gradually or they awaken with it in the
morning. In the survey mentioned above, 60 percent fell into
that category.
The idea that physical incidents are triggers is reinforced by
the fact that there is no way to distinguish between those pains
that start gradually and those that begin dramatically in terms
of subsequent severity or longevity of the attack. All of this
makes perfect sense when one considers the nature of TMS.
Despite the perception of injury, patients are not injured. The

The Manifestations ofTMS
13
physical occurrence has given the brain the opportunity to
begin an attack of TMS.
There is another reason to doubt the role of injury in these
attacks of back pain. One of the most powerful systems that
has evolved over the millions of years of life on this planet is
the biologic capacity for healing, for restoration. Our body
parts tend to heal very quickly when they are injured. Even
the largest bone in the body, the femur, only takes six weeks
to heal. And during that process there is pain for only a very
short time. It is illogical to think that an injury that occurred
two months ago might
still be causing pain, not to mention
one of two or ten years ago. And yet people have been so
thoroughly indoctrinated with the idea of persistent injury that
they accept
it without question.
Invariably those patients who have a gradual onset of pain
will attribute
it to a physical incident that may have occurred
years before, like an automobile or skiing accident. Because in
their minds back pain is "physical," that is, structural,
it must
be due to an injury. As far as they are concerned there has to
be a physical cause.
This idea
is one of the great impediments in the way of
recovery.
It must be resolved
in the
patient's mind or the
pain will persist. Gradually, patients need to begin to think
psychologically; and, indeed, once the diagnosis of TMS
is
made,
it
is common for patients to begin to recall
all of the
psychological things that were going on in their lives when
acute attacks occurred,
like starting a new job, getting mar-
ried, an illness in the family, a financial crisis and so on. Or
the patient will acknowledge that he or she has always been
a worrier, overly conscientious and responsible, compulsive
and perfectionistic. This is the beginning of wisdom, the start
of the process of putting things into proper perspective. In
this case, it is the recognition that there are physical disorders
that play a psychological role in human biology. Not to be

14
Healing Back Pain
aware of that fact
is to doom oneself to perpetual pain and
disability.
THE CHARACTER OF ONSET
The Acute Attack
Perhaps the most common, and undoubtedly the most fright-
ening, manifestation of TMS
is the acute
attack.
It usually
comes out of the blue and the pain
is often excruciating,
as
described in the case of the young man above. The most com-
mon location for these attacks
is the low back, involving the
lumbar (small of the back) muscles, the buttock muscles or
both. Any movement brings on a new wave of terrible pain
so the condition
is very upsetting, to say the least.
It is clear
that the involved muscles have gone into spasm. Spasm
is a
state of extreme contraction (tightening, tensing) of the mus-
cles, an abnormal condition that may be horrifically painful.
Most everyone has experienced a leg or foot cramp (charley
horse), which
is the same thing, except that the cramp will
stop as soon as the involved muscle
is stretched. The spasm
of an attack of TMS does not let up. When
it begins to ease,
any movement can start
it up again.
As will be described in the physiology chapter
(see page
59),
I believe that oxygen deprivation
is responsible for the
spasm as well as other kinds of pain characteristic of TMS. It
is likely that common leg cramps also result from oxygen depri-
vation, which
is why they usually occur in bed when the cir-
culation of blood
is slowed down and there
is liable to be a
temporary, minor state of reduced oxygenation in the leg mus-
cles. Blood flow can be quickly restored to normal with muscle
contraction. With TMS, however, reduced blood flow is con-
tinued by action of the autonomic nerves, and the abnormal
muscle state persists.
People often report that at the moment of onset they hear

The Manifestations ofTMS
15
some kind of noise, a crack, a snap or a pop. Patients often
use the phrase "My back went out." They are sure that some-
thing has broken. In fact, nothing breaks, but the patient will
swear that there has been some kind of structural damage. The
noise
is a mystery.
It may be that
it
is similar to the noise
elicited by a manipulation of the spine, which
is a kind of
"cracking the knuckles" of the joints of the spinal bones. One
thing is clear—the noise indicates nothing harmful.
Though the low back is the most common location for an
acute attack,
it can occur anywhere in the neck, shoulders or
upper and lower back. Wherever it occurs, it is the most painful
thing I know of in clinical medicine, which
is ironic because
it is completely harmless.
Not uncommonly the trunk
is distorted by one of these
attacks. It may be bent forward or to the side, or a bit of both.
The precise reason for and mechanism of this
is not known.
Naturally, it's very disturbing but it has no special significance.
These episodes last for varying periods oftime and invariably
leave the person with a sense of dread and apprehension. The
common perception
is that something terrible has happened
and that it is important to be very careful not to do anything
that will injure the back and bring on another attack.
If the low back pain
is accompanied by pain in the leg, or
sciatica, there
is even greater concern and apprehension, for
this raises the spectre of the herniated disc and the possibility
of surgery. In this media-dominated age very few people have
not heard of herniated discs and the idea arouses great anxiety,
resulting in greater pain.
If, in the course of medical investi-
gation, imaging studies show a herniation, the apprehension
is multiplied even further. And if there should be feelings of
numbness or tingling in the leg or foot and /or weakness,
all
of which can occur with TMS, because of burgeoning fear,
the conditions for a very protracted episode ofpain are defined.
As will be discussed later, herniated discs are rarely the cause
of the pain (see page 100).
There is not a great deal one can do to speed the resolution

16
Healing Back Fain
of such an episode. If the person is fortunate enough to know
what is going on, that this
is only a muscle spasm and there
is nothing structurally wrong, the attack will be short-lived.
But this is rarely the case. I advise my patients to remain quietly
in bed, perhaps take a strong painkiller, and not agonize over
what has happened. They are further instructed to keep testing
their ability to move around and not assume they are going
to be immobilized for days or weeks.
If one can overcome
one's apprehension, the duration of the attack will be consid-
erably shorter.
The Slow Onset ofPain
In over half the cases ofTMS the pain begins gradually—there
is no dramatic episode. In some cases there
is no physical
incident to which one can attribute the pain. In others onset
of pain may follow a physical happening, but hours, days or
even weeks
later. This pattern
is
fairly common
after a so-
called whiplash incident. A car is struck from behind and your
head snaps
back. Examination and X
rays do not
reveal
a
fracture or dislocation but sometime thereafter pain begins,
usually in the neck and shoulders, occasionally in the mid or
low back. Pain in an arm or hand may also occur and,
like
sciatica, arouses a great deal of anxiety. Sometimes the pain
begins in the neck and shoulders and then moves down to
involve the rest of the back. If one knows that this
is TMS,
the course may be relatively brief. If some sort of structural
diagnosis is made, symptoms may continue for many months,
despite treatment.
THE TIMING OF ONSET
Acute attack or slow onset, why does the pain begin when
it
does? Remember, the physical incident, no matter how dra-

The Manifestations ofTMS
1
7
matic,
is a trigger. The answer, of course,
is to be found in
one's psychological state. Sometimes the reason is obvious
a financial or health crisis, or something one ordinarily thinks
of as a happy occasion, like getting married or the birth of a
child. I have had a number ofhighly competitive people whose
pain began in the course of athletic competition, like a tennis
match. Naturally, they assumed that they had "hurt" them-
selves. When they realized they had TMS, they admitted how
very anxious they had been about the competition.
It is not the occasion itself but the degree of anxiety or anger
which
it generates that determines if there will be a physical
reaction. The important thing
is the emotion generated and
repressed, for we have a built-in tendency to repress unpleasant,
painful or embarrassing emotions. These repressed feelings are
the stimulus for TMS and other disorders like
it. Anxiety and
anger are two of those undesirable emotions that we would
rather not be aware of, and so the mind keeps them in the
subterranean precincts of the subconscious if it possibly can.
All of this
is discussed in detail in the psychology chapter.
Then there's the person who says, "There was absolutely
nothing going on in my life when this began." But when we
begin to discuss the
trials and tribulations of daily
life
it
is
usually clear that this person is generating anxiety all the time.
I think there is a gradual buildup in such people until a thresh-
old is reached, at which point the symptoms begin. Once it is
pointed out to them, these patients have little trouble recog-
nizing that they are the kind of perfectionist, highly responsible
people who generate a lot of subconscious anger and anxiety
in response to the pressures of everyday life.
The Delayed Onset Reaction
There is another interesting pattern that we see very often. In
these cases patients go through a highly stressful period that
may last for weeks or months, such as an illness in the family

18
Healing Back Pain
or a financial crisis. They are physically fine as they live through
the trouble, but one or two weeks after it's all over they have
an attack of back pain, either acute or slow onset. It seems as
though they rise to the occasion and do whatever they have
to do to deal with the trouble, but once
it's over the accu-
mulated anxiety threatens to overwhelm them, and so the pain
begins.
Another way of looking at it is that they don't have time to
be sick during the
crisis;
all of their emotional energy goes
into coping with the trouble.
A third possibility is that the crisis or stressful situation
is
providing enough emotional pain and distraction that a phys-
ical pain isn't necessary. The pain syndrome seems to function
to divert the person's attention away from repressed undesir-
able emotions
like
anxiety and
anger. When one
is
living
through
a
crisis there
is more than enough unpleasantness
going on and one has no need for a distraction.
Whatever the psychological explanation, this
is a common
pattern and
it
is important to recognize
it so that the back
pain will not be blamed on some "physical" condition.
The Weekend-Vacation Syndrome
When we generate anxiety depends mostly on the details of
our personality structure. Not uncommonly people will report
that they almost always have an attack of pain when they are
on vacation, or if they already have pain that it gets worse on
weekends. For some the reason is obvious. They are very anx-
ious about their work or business when they are away from
it.
It's a bit like the delayed reaction; as long as they are on
the job they may be "burning up" the anxiety but when they
are away from it, supposedly relaxing, the anxiety accumulates.
Speaking of relaxing, one often hears the advice "Relax," as
though that's something one can do voluntarily. There are also
numerous techniques around for promoting relaxation,
like

The Manifestations ofTMS
19
drugs, meditation and biofeedback, to name a few. However,
unless the relaxation process succeeds in reducing repressed
anxiety and anger, people will develop things like TMS and
tension headaches despite the attempt to induce relaxation.
Some people don't know how to leave their daily concerns
behind them and shift attention to something pleasurable.
I
remember a patient who said that her pain would invariably
begin when she got herself a drink and sat down to relax.
Recendy I saw a young man who illustrated the vacation
syndrome very well. He described having been under a lot of
stress for a long time, but without any back pain.
It wasn't
until he was on his honeymoon that he was awakened one
night with a "nightmarish dream" followed immediately by a
severe back spasm in which, he said, "my back went completely
out." Of course,
it might have been due to the stresses and
strains of being newly married, but he was an extremely con-
scientious type and I was inclined to connect it with his work.
He was still having symptoms when I saw him three months
later, no doubt due to the fact that an MRI had shown a disc
herniation at the lower end of the spine and the possibility of
surgery had been discussed. (An MRI, or magnetic resonance
imaging,
is an advanced diagnostic procedure that is capable
of producing an image of body soft tissues allowing one to
detect the presence ofsuch things as tumors or herniated discs.)
However, he read my book on TMS, thought that he was
typical of the patients described, and came in to see me. The
examination was conclusive for TMS. In fact,
it showed that
his symptoms could not be due to the herniated disc, for he
had weakness in two sets of muscles in his leg, something that
the herniated disc could not have caused. Only involvement
of the sciatic nerve, as is typical in TMS, could have produced
this neurological picture. At any rate, he was delighted to learn
that TMS was the basis for his back troubles and had a rapid
recovery.
Another explanation, often difficult for people to admit to
themselves, is that there are great sources of anxiety and anger

20
Healing Back Fain
in their personal lives, like a bad marriage, trouble with chil-
dren, having to care for an elderly parent. We have seen nu-
merous examples of this: women trapped in bad marriages that
they cannot stand and yet unable to break out because of their
emotional and/or
financial dependence on
their husbands;
people who
feel perfectly competent at what they do for a
living but who cannot deal with a difficult spouse or child.
I recall a woman with a persistent pain problem who lived
with a very difficult brother. Despite psychotherapy the pain
continued. One day she told me that she had done a very
unusual thing; she had gotten furious
at her brother, had
shouted and ranted at him and stormed out of the house. And
with that—the pain disappeared. Unfortunately, she could not
maintain her strong posture and the pain returned.
The Holiday Syndrome
One often hears or reads that holidays may be stressful. What
should be a time of relaxation and fun often turns out to be
unpleasant for some people. I have been struck by the fact that
many patients will report the onset of attacks ofTMS before,
during or shortly after major holidays.
The reason
is obvious: big holidays usually mean a lot of
work, particularly for women, who take the responsibility in
our culture for organizing and carrying out the festivities. And,
of course, society demands that this be done cheerfully, with
a smile. Usually the women are completely unaware that they
are generating great quantities of resentment, and the onset
of pain comes as a complete surprise.
THE NATURAL HISTORY OF TMS
What are the common patterns of TMS? What happens over
time if one continues to be plagued by this disorder?

The Manifestations ofTMS
21
Conditioning
Essential to an understanding of this subject
is knowledge
about a very important phenomenon known as conditioning.
A more modern term meaning the same thing is programming
\
All animals, including humans, are conditionable. The phe-
nomenon
is best known by the experiment reported by the
Russian physiologist Pavlov, who is credited with the discov-
ery ofconditioning. His experiment demonstrated that animals
develop associations which can produce automatic and repro-
ducible physical reactions. In the research study he rang a bell
each time he fed a group of dogs. After repeating this a few
times he found that the dogs would salivate if he rang the bell
even without the presentation of food. They had become con-
ditioned to have a physical reaction at the sound of the bell.
The process of conditioning, or programming, seems to be
very important in determining when the person with TMS
will have pain. For example, a common complaint of people
with low back pain is that it is invariably brought on by sitting.
This
is such a benign activity one is mystified by the fact that
it initiates pain. But conditioning occurs when two things go
on simultaneously, so it is easy to imagine that at some point
early in the course of the TMS experience the person happens
to be having pain while sitting. The brain makes the association
between sitting and the presence of pain and that person
is
now programmed to expect pain with sitting. In other words,
the pain occurs because of its subconscious association with
sitting, not because sitting
is bad for the back. That
is one
way a conditioned response may be established. There must
be others
I am unaware of since sitting
is such
a common
problem for people with low back pain. Car seats have a bad
reputation, so a person expects to have pain when he or she
gets into a car.
Often people are programmed to have pain because ofthings

22
Healing Back Fain
they have heard or been told by a practitioner. "Never bend
at the waist" means the onset of pain is a sure thing when they
bend from then on, although
it may never have caused pain
before. Someone says that sitting compresses the lower end
of the spine—so, of course,
it's got to hurt when you
sit.
Standing in one place, lifting, carrying— all have a bad repu-
tation and will quickly be conditioned into a patient's pattern.
Many people report that the pain
is relieved by walking;
others say that walking brings
it on. Some have a great deal
of pain at night and cannot sleep. One man worked hard all
day long with a fair amount ofheavy lifting and never a twinge
of pain. Every night he would wake up about 3:00 a.m. with
severe pain that persisted until he got out of bed. Clearly a
conditioned reaction.
Others report that they sleep well but develop pain as soon
as they wake up and get out of bed. In these patients the pain
usually increases in severity as the day goes on.
Based on history and physical examination, all of these peo-
ple have TMS but are programmed to believe they suffer from
something
else. What gives strong support to the idea that
these reactions are conditioned
is that they disappear within
a few weeks as patients go through my treatment program. If
they were structurally based they would not go away after
treatment (consisting primarily of lecture seminars), which is
what happens with successfully treated patients. The condi-
tioning is broken by the educational process.
One cannot overemphasize the importance of conditioning
in TMS for it explains many ofthe reactions that patients don't
understand. If someone says, "I can lift a very light weight but
anything over five pounds will cause pain," the pain can't be
based on structural grounds. Or this example: a woman who
could bend over and touch her palms to the floor without pain
but told me she always felt pain when she put her shoes on!
Many of these conditioned responses stem from the fear that
people develop when they have back pain, especially in the
low back. They have been told and they have read that the

The Manifestations ofTMS
23
back is fragile, vulnerable and easily injured, so if they try to
do something vigorous, like jog or swim or vacuum the floor,
their backs begin to hurt. They have learned to associate ac-
tivity with pain; they expect
it, so
it happens. That is condi-
tioning.
The specific posture or activity that brings on the pain
is
not important per se. What is essential is to know that it has
been programmed in as a part of the TMS and
is, therefore,
of psychological rather than physical significance.
Common Patterns ofTMS
Perhaps the most common pattern
is for the person to have
recurrent acute attacks of the kind described earlier. These may
last from days to weeks or even months, with the most acute
pain subsiding after a few days. They are traditionally treated
with bed
rest,
painkillers and anti-inflammatory drugs, ad-
ministered by mouth or by injection. If the patient is hospi-
talized, traction
is often employed, though
its purpose
is to
immobilize the patient and not to pull the spinal bones apart
since this could not be done with the weights used.
I do not
instruct my patients what to do for an acute attack, for
it
is
the goal of this program to see that the attacks don't occur
to prevent them. However, occasionally I am called upon to
advise someone having an acute attack; as stated earlier in the
chapter,
it's
essentially a question of waiting
it out.
I may
prescribe
a strong
painkiller but not an anti-inflammatory
drug, since there is no inflammation.
The irony of the usual experience with one of these attacks
is that most patients would be better off if they consulted no
one. This
is unwise, however, because every once in a while
there may be something physiologically important going on
and so one must be examined by a physician. Assuming noth-
ing truly serious, like a tumor,
is present, the usual diagnosis
is some spinal structural abnormality. A scary diagnosis (de-

24
Healing Back Fain
generative disc disease, herniated disc, arthritis, spinal stenosis
or facet syndrome) plus the dire warnings ofwhat will happen
if the patient doesn't take sufficient bed rest and cautioning
about never again jogging or using a vacuum cleaner or bowl-
ing or playing tennis is the perfect combination for multiplied
and persistent pain.
But the human spirit is more or less indomitable and even-
tually the symptoms fade, leaving someone who is essentially
free of pain but permanendy scarred, not physically but emo-
tionally. Except for the very brave few, most people who have
had such an attack never again engage in vigorous physical
activity with an easy mind. They have been sensitized by the
experience and
all that
it
is supposed to imply and they see
themselves, to a greater or lesser degree, as permanendy
al-
tered. They fear another attack and eventually it comes. It may
be six months or a year later but the prophecy is fulfilled and
the dreaded event occurs again. As before, the person usually
attributes the attack to some physical incident. This time there
may be leg pain as well as back pain and now there is talk of
surgery should a herniated disc be found on MRI or CT scan.
(CT, or computed tomography,
is an advanced X-ray tech-
nique that can,
like the MRI, give information about soft
tissues as well as bone.) This further increases anxiety and the
pain may become even more severe.
This pattern of recurrence of acute attacks is very common.
As time goes on the attacks tend to come more frequendy, to
be more severe and to last longer. And with each new attack
the fear increases and there
is an increased tendency to limit
physical activities. Some patients become virtually disabled as
time goes on.
In my view physical
restrictions and the
fear of physical
activity represent the worst aspect of these pain syndromes.
They are ever present, though the pain may come and go.
They have a profound affect on all aspects of life: work, family,
leisure time. Indeed,
I have known patients with TMS who
were much more disabled
in terms of their daily lives than

The Manifestations ofTMS
25
patients who were paralyzed in both legs. Many of the latter
go to work every day on their own, raise families and in every
way lead normal lives, except that they are in wheelchairs. The
severe TMS patient may have to stay in bed most of the day
because of the pain.
Eventually most people who have recurrent attacks will de-
velop a chronic pattern. They will begin to have some pain all
the time, usually mild, but exacerbated by a variety of activities
or postures to which they have become conditioned. "I can
lie on my left side but not on my right"; "I must always have
a pillow between my knees in bed";
"I never go anywhere
without my seat cushion"; "My body corset (or neck collar)
is absolutely essential if I am to remain free of pain"; "If I sit
for more than five minutes I get severe pain"; "The only chair
I can sit on has to have a hard seat and a straight back"; and
on and on.
And to some the pain becomes the primary focus of their
lives. It is not uncommon to hear people say that the pain is
the
first thing they are aware of when they awaken in the
morning and the last thing they think about when they go to
sleep. They become obsessed with
it.
There
is great variety in the manifestations of TMS. There
are those who have a little pain all the time with varying degrees
of physical
restriction. Others have occasional acute attacks
but live essentially normal lives in between with
little or no
restriction.
What I have been describing are the more common mani-
festations of TMS and the most dramatic, those in the low
back and legs. However, a severe episode involving the neck,
shoulders and arms can be very dramatic too—and just
as
physically restricting. Here is a typical example.
The patient was a middle-aged man who had been having
recurrent attacks of pain in the neck and shoulders and pain,
numbness and tingling in his hands for about three years prior
to the time
I saw him. The episode that brought him to me
had begun about eight months previously with pain in the left

26
Healing Back Pain
arm. He saw two neurologists, had a variety of sophisticated
tests and was told that the pain was the result of a "disc prob-
lem" in the neck. There was debate whether he should have
immediate surgery; he was warned that he might become par-
alyzed if he didn't. Not surprisingly, the pain spread from his
arm to his neck and back; he was unable to ski or play tennis,
two of his favorite sports. He was very frightened.
My examination disclosed that he had TMS and that there
were no neurological abnormalities. Fortunately, a third neu-
rologist concluded that there was no structural basis for his
pain so he was able to accept the diagnosis of TMS with an
easy mind. He went through the program and in a few weeks
was free of pain and able to resume his usual athletic activities.
He has not had a recurrence.
Sometimes the shoulder is the site of the trouble or the knee.
To anyone who tries to be physically active, knee pain can be
very debilitating. I have had such an episode and can attest to
the fact that it can be scary, persistent and restricting. Any of
the tendons and ligaments in the arms and legs and any of the
muscles and nerves of the neck, shoulders, back and buttocks
can be involved in TMS.
Though we must identify the structures involved in each
case, this is the least important part of the consultation. Each
encounter with a patient is an excursion into that person's life.
After we have established which body parts are involved that
information must be put aside, for we do not work on the
muscles, nerves and ligaments directiy. Something in that per-
son's emotional life that might have played a role in producing
the symptoms must be addressed.
There comes to mind the case of a man who had found
himself financially well-off enough to retire from business at
an early age and who shortly thereafter developed the pain
syndrome for which
I saw him. As we talked
it became ap-
parent that since his retirement he had become preoccupied
with a number of family problems, there had been a number
of deaths in the family, he was worried about the health of

The Manifestations ofTMS
27
the business he had left (in the hands of relatives), and he had
begun to wonder what his life was all about now that he was
retired and was thinking about aging and mortality for the
first time. His concern about these matters, considered con-
sciously and unconsciously, had produced sufficient anxiety
(and anger) to precipitate the TMS. Conventional medicine
had attributed his pain to an aging spine, and treatment for
that had, naturally, failed. He had TMS; his troubles were not
in his spine—they were in his life.
To summarize, TMS may involve postural muscles, nerves
that are in and around those muscles, and a variety of tendons
and ligaments in the arms and legs. In the areas involved, the
patient has pain, possibly feelings of pins and needles and/or
weakness. There are many different patterns and locations of
symptoms and considerable variation in severity, ranging from
mild annoyance to almost total disability.
Recurrent attacks, fear of recurrence and physical activity,
and failure to find successful treatment characterize TMS.
The symptoms of pain, numbness, tingling and weakness
are intended by the brain to suggest that something is phys-
ically wrong. To most people, practitioners and laymen alike,
"physically wrong" means injury, weakness, incompetence and
degeneration, singly or in combination. To further this view
of the symptoms, the pain often begins in association with
some physical activity, the more vigorous the better. The pa-
tient can't help but conclude that something has been injured
or displaced. "My back went out" is a common description of
the event.
Also very important to advancing the idea of structural in-
competence
is the powerful tendency for people to become
programmed to fear a variety of simple, common things like
sitting, standing in one place, bending and lifting.
The net effect of symptoms, fears and alterations in life-style
and daily activities
is to produce someone whose attention
is
strongly focused on the body. As shall be seen in succeeding

28
Healing Back Pain
chapters, that
is the purpose of the syndrome—to create a
distraction so that undesirable emotions can be avoided.
It
seems a heavy price to pay, but then the inner workings of
the mind are not really known, and we can only suspect
its
deep aversion to frightening, painful feelings.

2
The Psychology
of TMS
Neck, shoulder and back pain syndromes are not mechanical
problems to be cured by mechanical means. They have to do
with people's feelings, their personalities and the vicissitudes
of life. If this
is true, the conventional management of these
pain syndromes
is a medical travesty. Traditional medical di-
agnoses focus on the machine, the body, while the real problem
seems to relate to what makes the machine work—the mind.
TMS
is characterized by physical pain but that acute discom-
fort is induced by psychological phenomena rather than struc-
tural abnormalities or muscle deficiency. This is an exceedingly
important point; and just how this works will be clarified in
the pages to follow. But first a few definitions to be sure that
the terms are clear.
TENSION
Tension is a word that is widely used and means different things
to different people; in my work and in this book the disorder
is called the Tension Myositis Syndrome. The word tension is
used here to refer to emotions that are generated in the un-
29

30
Healing Back Fain
conscious mind and that, to a large extent, remain there. These
feelings are the result of a complicated interaction between
different parts of our minds and between the mind and the
outside world. Many of them are either unpleasant, painful or
embarrassing, in some way unacceptable to us and/or society,
and so we repress them. The kinds of feelings referred to are
anxiety, anger and low self-esteem
(feelings of inferiority).
They are repressed because the mind doesn't want us to ex-
perience them, nor does it want them to be seen by the outside
world. It is likely that, if given a conscious choice, most of us
would decide to deal with the bad feelings; but as the human
mind
is presentiy constituted, they are immediately and au-
tomatically repressed—one has no choice.
To sum up, the word tension will be used here to refer to
repressed, unacceptable emotions.
STRESS
The word stress
is often confused with tension and seems to
stand for anything that
is emotionally negative.
I like to use
it to refer to any factor, influence or condition that tests, strains
or in any way puts pressure on the individual. We can be
stressed physically or emotionally. Excessive heat or cold are
physical stressors;
a demanding job or family problems are
emotional ones. The stress involved in TMS leads to emotional
reactions that are repressed.
The work of Dr. Hans Selye
is credited with first drawing
attention to how stress affects the body; his research and writ-
ing were prolific and stand as one of the major accomplish-
ments
of medicine
in
the
twentieth
century.
Dr.
Selye's
definition of biological stress is: "the nonspecific response of the
body to any demand made upon it."
Stress can be either external or internal to the individual.
Examples of external stress are your job, financial problems,
illness, change of job or home, caring for children or parents.

The Psychology ofTMS
31
However, the internal stressors appear to be more important
in the production of tension. These are one's own personality
attributes, like conscientiousness, perfectionism, the need to
excel, and so
forth. People often say that they have a very
stressful job and that's why they're tense. But if they weren't
conscientious about doing a good job, if they weren't trying
to succeed, achieve and excel, they wouldn't generate tension.
Often such people are highly competitive and determined to
get ahead. Typically, they are more critical of themselves than
others are of them.
A homemaker and mother with a similar personality stresses
herself in the same way as someone in the work world, but
the focus of her concerns is the family. She worries about her
children, her husband, her parents. She wants the best for
everyone and will do everything in her power to bring it about.
She may also tell you that it is important to her that everyone
like her, that she gets very upset
if she
feels that anyone
is
displeased with her. (This compulsion to please is, of course,
not limited to women; a middle-aged man expressed identical
sentiments in my office recently.)
Stress, then,
is outside what one might call the inner core
of the emotional structure and is composed of the stresses and
strains of daily
life and, more importantly, aspects of one's
own personality. And stress leads to tension (repressed, un-
acceptable feelings). Now
let's take a closer look at the per-
sonality.
THE CONSCIOUS MIND
The part of your personality that you're aware of resides in
the conscious mind;
it is the realm of emotions you can feel.
You feel sad, glad, exhilarated, depressed; you also know that
you are conscientious, hardworking, a worrier, perhaps com-
pulsive and perfectionistic. You may realize that you are often
irritable or you're aware of having a need to assert yourself.

32
Healing Back Pain
A man may have strong feelings of masculine superiority and
be aware of it, indeed proud of it. These make up the conscious
you and they seem to determine what we do in life and how
we conduct ourselves. But do they? Often these outward char-
acteristics reflect inner drives of which we may be totally un-
aware, so it is important to look at the subconscious mind, as
we shall do in a moment.
Many people with TMS are aware of possessing conscien-
tious personality characteristics. They often refer to themselves
as Type A people, after the work of Dr. Meyer Friedman and
Dr. Ray Rosenman, who described the type of person prone
to coronary artery disease in their book Type A Behavior and
Tour Heart (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1974). What they
described is someone who is hard-driving, obsessed with work
to the extreme. Such a person might claim to work eighteen
hours a day and never feel tired.
This
is
not
characteristic
of someone who
gets TMS.
Though hardworking, there
is awareness of one's limitations
and certainly some awareness of oneself as an emotional being.
I have the impression that the true Type A person
is not at
all in touch with himself emotionally. He or she tends to deny
feelings as though they are a sign of weakness. That there
is
an important difference between the patient who gets TMS
and the Type A person
is based on the observation that
it is
rare for TMS patients to have
a history of coronary artery
disease or to develop it later. There have been a few, of course,
but nothing like the numbers of patients who have had other
things, like stomach trouble, colitis, hay fever, tension head-
ache, migraine headache, acne, hives and many other condi-
tions that seem to be related to tension. These appear to be
equivalents of TMS and reflect a lower level of compulsivity
than that of the Type A person.
The personality characteristics of which we are aware rep-
resent only a part of our emotional makeup and may be less
important than that which
is unconscious.

The Psychology ofTMS
33
THE UNCONSCIOUS MIND
The word unconscious has an unfortunate other use, that is, to
be out ofcontact as in sleep or when brain damaged. However,
it is firmly entrenched in the psychological literature as refer-
ring to that part of emotional activity of which we are usually
unaware, and we should, therefore, use the word when dis-
cussing emotions. We would probably be more comfortable
with the word subconscious, and will use it when talking about
things below the level of awareness other than the emotions.
The unconscious
is subterranean, the realm of the hidden
and mysterious and the place where
all sorts of feelings may
reside, not all logical, not all nice and some ofthem downright
scary. We get some hint of the kind of things that inhabit the
unconscious from our dreams. Someone said that every night
when we go to sleep we all go quietiy and safely insane because
that's when the remnants of childish, primitive, wild behavior
that are a part of everyone's emotional repertoire can show
themselves without being monitored by the waking, conscious
mind. The unconscious is the repository of all of our feelings,
regardless of their social or personal acceptability. To know
about the unconscious is extremely important, for what goes
on down there may be responsible for those personality char-
acteristics that drive us to behave as we do when we're awake
and the unconscious
is where TMS and other disorders like
it originate.
It
is an interesting fact that the overwhelming majority of
emotional and mental activity occurs below the level of con-
sciousness. The human mind
is something like an iceberg
the part that we are aware of, the conscious mind, represents
a very small part of the total.
It
is in the subconscious mind
that all of the complicated processing goes on that allows us,
for example, to generate written and oral language; to think,
to reason, to remember;
in short, to do most of the things

34
Heeding Back Pain
that identify us as human beings. Our ability to make sense
of the things we see, to recognize faces, and dozens of other
mental
activities we take for granted are the result of brain
activity of which we are unaware.
It is likely that the majority of emotional reactions occur in
the unconscious. Feelings that remain there do so because they
are repressed and
it
is these that are responsible for the se-
quence of events that causes TMS. This condition begins and
ends in the unconscious.
Incidentally, one should make a distinction, as Freud did a
long time ago, between mental items that are not conscious
but which can be brought to consciousness with effort, like the
things in our memories—Freud called that mental domain the
preconscious—and things in the unconscious that are unavailable
and cannot be recalled. We simply don't know they are there.
To better understand how and why TMS gets started,
it's
essential to look at some of these unconscious emotional pro-
cesses.
Law Self-Esteem
I find it almost shocking to realize how common it is for people
to have feelings of inferiority deep inside. There must be a
cultural reason
for
this
that
is
reflected in the way we
are
managed as children and, therefore, the way we develop. This
is a subject that should be studied intensively and no doubt
will be someday. These feelings of inferiority are deep and
hidden but reveal themselves through our behavior. We gen-
erally overcompensate for bad feelings, so if we feel weak, we
act strong. This was
beautifully
illustrated many years ago
when a self-proclaimed "tough guy" came under my care for
crippling back pain. The staff reported that he was constantly
bragging about his prowess
in hand-to-hand combat,
in
fi-
nancial matters and with women. In my office he wept incon-
solably
about
his
inability
to
cope
with
his
back
pain.

The Psychology ofTMS
35
Emotionally, he was a very
little boy trying desperately to
prove to himself and the world how tough he was.
It
is likely that for most of us the compulsive need to do
well, succeed and achieve is a reflection of deep-seated feelings
of inferiority. Wherever it comes from, the need to accomplish
or live up to some ideal role, such as being the best parent,
student or worker,
is very common in people who get TMS.
A typical example was a patient who through compulsive
hard work established a very successful business and became
the patriarch and benefactor of his large family. He enjoyed
the
role but
felt the
responsibility deeply. Throughout his
entire adult
life he had low back pain, which resisted
all
at-
tempts at treatment. By the time I saw him the pain patterns
were deeply ingrained and part of his everyday life. He under-
stood the concept of tension-induced pain but was unable to
erase the patterns of a lifetime. He felt that he was too old to
engage in psychotherapy, which is often required for patients
like this. The primary benefit he derived from treatment was
the reassurance that there was nothing structurally wrong with
his back.
Another patient was a young man in his twenties who had
his
first child shortly before he opened a new branch of the
family business. The simultaneous imposition of these new
responsibilities in this very conscientious young man induced
severe low back pain due to TMS. As soon as he became aware
that the source of his symptoms was inner tension, the pain
disappeared. As will be seen
later, awareness
is the key to
recovery from TMS.
What these two people had in common was a great sense
of responsibility and a strong inner drive to succeed in both
business and family matters. Such people don't need to be
monitored; they are self-motivated, self-disciplined, their own
severest critics.
People who get TMS are often intensely competitive, success
oriented, achieving and usually very accomplished. In our cul-

36
Healing Back Fain
tare success often requires the ability to compete effectively,
and they do. They are accustomed to putting a great deal of
pressure on themselves and often feel as though they have not
done enough.
Sometimes
the
perfectionism
manifests
itself in unusual
ways. I remember seeing a young man once who had grown
up on a farm. He said that when he had read my first book
he didn't see how this perfectionism applied to him until he
realized that at haying time he had a powerful compulsion to
stack the bales of hay perfecdy.
At this point if you're mentally scratching your head and
wondering why being hardworking, conscientious or com-
pulsive and perfectionistic should bring on TMS, you're right.
It is clear that there is a relationship between these personality
characteristics and this pain syndrome, but what is it> To un-
derstand this we need to think about anxiety and anger.
Anxiety and Anger
Not being trained in psychology or psychiatry I am aware that
my concepts and explanations of what goes on in this psy-
chophysiologic process may sound naive to professionals in
these
fields. However, this
is a book for the general public,
and the lack of jargon and complex concepts will probably be
welcome. My lack of training in these fields notwithstanding,
what I have observed about the nature of this pain syndrome
and its causes should be taken seriously by psychology profes-
sionals. We are dealing here with the almost totally unexplored
territory between what
is purely mental-emotional and what
is
physical. There
is
a powerful and important link which,
sadly, contemporary medical science (with a few notable ex-
ceptions) is unwilling to explore. The reason for that reluctance
is discussed in chapter 7, "Mind and Body." My experience in
the diagnosis and treatment of TMS throws some light on

The Psychology ofTMS
37
what is going on in that mysterious domain where the emo-
tional and the physical connect.
Anger and anxiety are discussed together for
I think they
are closely related and are the primary repressed feelings behind
TMS and other disorders like
it.
It was obvious from the beginning of my experience with
TMS that most patients shared the personality characteristics
described above. Those who denied possessing any of those
characteristics eventually admitted that they had many emo-
tional concerns but they tended to deny them and instead
would "put them out of my mind."
With this repertoire of personality traits it was not difficult
to postulate that anxiety was responsible for TMS, since such
an individual would be anxious about how things would turn
out. Anxiety is a uniquely human phenomenon, closely related
to
fear but much more sophisticated,
for
it
is rooted in a
capacity animals do not possess—the ability to anticipate. Anx-
iety arises in response to the perception of danger and is logical
unless the perception
is
illogical,
as
is often the
case. The
anxious person tends to anticipate danger, often where there
is little or none. This is the nature of the human animal. How-
ever, he or she
is often not aware of this anxiety, for
it
is
generated in the unconscious out of feelings that are largely
unconscious and are kept in the unconscious through the well-
known mechanism of repression. Because of the unpleasant,
embarrassing, often painful nature of these feelings and the
anxiety they generate, there is a strong need to keep them out
of consciousness, which
is the purpose of repression. As will
be seen later, the purpose of TMS
is to assist in the process
of repression.
Narcissism
The
role of low self-esteem was described above. Standing
right beside this deeply buried feeling is another of equal im-

38
Healing Back Fain
portance, called narcissism. It refers to the human tendency to
love oneself, that is, to be self-centered to an excessive degree.
The evolution of culture in the United States seems to have
produced people who are much more "I" than "we" oriented.
I have heard it said that many ofthe American Indian languages
had no pronouns for J and mc because of a powerful sense of
community and of being part of something larger than them-
selves. By contrast, contemporary North Americans believe in
individualism and have great admiration for the person who
"goes
it alone." But the other side of that coin
is that the
individual may become overly focused on himself and, if he is
not motivated by lofty ideals, tend to greediness and avarice.
It is shocking and revealing to contemplate respected members
of the business community or government engaged in felo-
nious
acts, but
it
is not surprising when one considers that
this
is a logical extension of today's narcissistic trends.
Anger
Narcissism exists in all human beings to some degree. When
it is strong it can make trouble since it means that the person
is easily irritated, often frustrated by contact with others who
do not do his bidding, or do it badly. The result is anger, and
if the person is very narcissistic he or she may be angry all the
time but never know
it because, like anxiety,
it has been re-
pressed.
It's all there in the unconscious mind.
Here's a seeming paradox. On the one hand we have poor
self-esteem but then our narcissism leads us to behave emo-
tionally like reigning monarchs.
It
is the story of the prince
and the pauper—they are one and the same person. These
diametrically different feelings are opposite sides of the same
coin, though
it may strike us
as strange that they generally
exist simultaneously.
How typical of the human mind.
It appears to be a store-

The Psychology ofTMS
39
house of often conflicting feelings and tendencies, most of
which we are totally unaware of.
We are angry for other reasons. In fact, anything that makes
us anxious
(all unconscious)
will tend to make us angry as
well. You're trying to do a good job; you hope
it turns out
well (anxious), but you're also resentful of the problems with
which you must contend, like other people and their needs
(angry).
Although the production of anxiety and anger is often work
related, personal relationships are an equally common source
of repressed emotions. Family dynamics often produce serious
problems that may be unrecognized because of their subtlety.
One of my patients was a woman in her late forties who
had had
a sheltered adolescence, an early marriage and,
as
dictated by her culture, thereafter had devoted herself exclu-
sively to home and family. She did an excellent job since she
was
an
intelligent, competent and compassionate woman.
However, there came a time when she began to resent the fact
that she had not been allowed to go to school as a child and
could not read and write, could not drive a car and had been
denied many experiences because the needs of her family so
dominated her life. She was totally unaware of the existence
of this resentment and, as a consequence, developed a long,
disabling history of back pain, including unsuccessful surgery.
When she came to my attention she was in constant pain and
was almost totally unable to function. Through the education
program and psychotherapy she became aware of these
re-
pressed feelings and the pain gradually disappeared.
The process was not without psychological trauma, for now
she was faced with the disapproval of her family and friends
and her own deeply ingrained attitudes. She was in consid-
erable conflict and now experienced emotional pain. But this
was appropriate and vastiy preferable to the physical pain, of
which she had been a helpless victim.
An important source of anger and resentment, of which we
are usually unaware, stems from our sense of responsibility to

40
Healing Back Fain
those who are close to us, like parents, spouses and children.
Though we love them, they may burden us in many ways and
the resultant anger is internalized. How can one be angry at
elderly parents or a baby?
A good example: A man in his forties went to visit his elderly
parents in another city. Before the weekend was over he had
a recurrence ofback pain, the first since successfully completing
the TMS therapeutic program a year before. When I suggested
that the return of pain meant that something was bothering
him subconsciously, he said the weekend had been pleasant.
But then he revealed that his mother was feeble, that he had
spent most of the weekend ministering to her needs, and that
both of his parents were a worry to him. To make matters
worse, they lived a plane ride away. But he was a good man,
and his parents couldn't help
it if they were getting old. So
his natural (intrinsic, unconscious, narcissistically inspired) an-
noyance (anger, resentment) was completely repressed and, for
reasons which shall be clarified shortly, gave
rise to the
re-
currence of back pain.
Or take the case of the young father whose first-born turns
out to be a nonsleeper. Not only does he lose sleep but his
wife
is pretty much tied up with baby around the clock. He
has to pitch in during his free time, their social life
is much
curtailed and what was a long honeymoon before baby came
is now a grind. He develops back pain because he's mad at
the baby (ridiculous), and angry at his wife because she can
no longer minister to his emotional and physical needs as she
had before (absurd). And to make matters worse he has be-
come a part-time nursemaid and cook. But he doesn't know
about any of these
feelings—they are deeply buried
in
his
unconscious; and to make sure they stay there he gets back
pain—TMS.
There
is a large group of psychologists and doctors who
would put
a
different interpretation on the young
father's
plight. They would say his back hurts from lifting the baby
and not getting enough sleep; and that the pain
is very bad

The Psychology ofTMS
41
because he's trying to get out ofdoing his part with the baby
now he has
a good excuse. Of course, they say,
this
is
all
subconscious.
This is the so-called secondary gain theory of chronic pain.
The trouble with
it
is that it presupposes a structural reason
for the pain, which
is usually untenable
(this baby's father
played high school and college
football);
and, secondly,
it
elevates to preeminence a feeling that is either minor or non-
existent, that the person is deriving some benefit from the pain.
Behavioral psychologists like
it, however, because
it's simple
and
all you have to do
is reward "non-pain behavior" and
punish its opposite. There
is no getting involved with messy
unconscious feelings like anxiety and anger. Years ago, before
I knew about TMS,
I tried this approach and found
it sin-
gularly ineffective. Little wonder— it was the wrong diagnosis.
All family relationships are emotionally loaded. It is one of
the first things to be considered when someone has an attack
ofTMS that seems to come out of nowhere. The combination
of real concern and love for the family member and inner
resentment of the duties and responsibilities associated with
the relationship are a source of deep conflict, the stuffofwhich
TMS is made.
Here is a classic story with some interesting sidelights about
the natural history ofTMS. The patient was a thirty-nine-year-
old married man who ran a family business originally started
by his father. He told me that his father was still active in the
business but that he had become a hindrance rather than a
help. He admitted to conflict with his father over this and to
feeling guilty about the whole thing. The pain syndrome had
begun about two and
a half years
before, and about four
months into the experience he read my first book. He decided
it was hogwash and proceeded to make his way through the
medical system, determined to get rid of the pain. He said he
saw many doctors and tried virtually every available treatment,
with no success. Two years later he was still in pain, was rapidly
becoming obsessed with
it, and was extremely limited physi-

42
Healing Back Vain
cally. He was afraid of any physical activity and could not even
bend. At that point he read the book again and reported with
incredulity, "It had a totally different effect on me." He said
he saw himself on every page. His explanation was that he had
to go through all the tests and doctors before he was ready to
acknowledge a psychological basis for the pain.
Needless to say, he did very well on the program and was
soon free of pain. During the consultation I found him to be
so perceptive and psychologically attuned I could not imagine
that he had originally rejected the diagnosis.
It was a lesson
to me: One of the unfortunate realities about working with a
disorder like TMS is that most people will reject the idea until
they are desperate for a solution.
The reason for the pain syndrome, the man's conflict over
his relationship with his father, was very clear.
Here is another good example of the role of family dynamics
in producing symptoms. A woman who had been successfully
treated for low back pain two years prior called one day to
tell me that she had now developed neck, shoulder and arm
pain but was certain
it was due to a painful psychological
situation involving her husband and teenage stepdaughter.
I
encouraged her to carry on without formal treatment but the
situation remained unresolved and the pain became increas-
ingly severe; she also lost considerable motion in both shoul-
ders,
a common
consequence
of TMS
in
the
neck
and
shoulders. Then one day she decided to
face the problem
squarely and confront her husband. The result was a surpris-
ingly easy solution that defused the entire situation, and with
resolution of her personal problems the pain disappeared. She
had undoubtedly harbored great resentment, and as long as
she did the pain persisted. I shall have more to say about how
one deals with this kind of situation in the treatment chapter,
but
this case
clearly
illustrates the
relationship between
re-
pressed anger and TMS.
One of the great sources of conflict in the unconscious
is
the battle which rages between those feelings and needs that

The Psychology ofTMS
43
stem from the narcissistic impulses described above and an-
other very real part of the mind that is concerned with what
is appropriate, reasonable and mature or, even more demand-
ing, what you should be doing. The well-known psychoana-
lyst, writer and teacher Karen Horney described what she
called "the tyranny of the should," which may dominate some-
one's
life. Patients often describe in detail how their lives are
governed by these behavioral imperatives. One woman told
me, after denying that she was compulsive or perfectionistic,
that she came from a family that prided itself on its strength
of character and rigidity, "stiff upper lip" and all that stuff. It
was clear that there were other parts of her personality that
were softer and more pliable, so the conflict in her unconscious
must have been considerable.
Sometimes the pressure to behave in a certain way comes
from one's culture. I recall a strikingly attractive woman who
was part of a religious group that believed in very large fam-
ilies; six or eight children were not unusual. Though she ac-
knowledged that her pain was due to "tension"
it persisted
and she couldn't understand why. I suggested that she might
be resentful of the work and responsibility for such a large
family. For a long time she denied this, insisting that she felt
no such resentment, and the pain continued, sometimes very
severely.
I pointed out that she would not be aware of the
feeling since
it was unconscious and repressed. Perseverance,
both hers and mine, paid off. She began to get inklings of her
deeply repressed resentment, and then had a dramatic reso-
lution of her symptoms.
The longer I work with TMS the more impressed I am with
the role of anger. We have all learned to repress it so completely
that we are totally unaware of its existence in many situations.
In fact,
I have begun to wonder if anger
is not more funda-
mental to the development of symptoms than anxiety and,
indeed, whether anxiety itself may be a reaction to repressed
anger.
The following story made a deep impression on me. The

44
Healing Back Fain
man was in his midforties and, among other things, had a
history of having occasional panic
attacks. These represent
acute anxiety. After having examined him and established that
he had TMS, we discussed the psychology of the disorder and
I told him that I was beginning to suspect that anger might
be more important than anxiety. He said that something had
just happened to him that supported that supposition. He had
become extremely angry at someone and was on the point of
starting an altercation when he decided that it would not be
appropriate, that he had better swallow
it. Within moments
he had a panic attack! He was probably more than angry
he was in a rage, and the need to repress it, both unconsciously
and consciously, necessitated some kind of reaction, hence the
panic attack. As we shall see in a moment this is precisely the
kind of situation that brings on TMS and other physical re-
actions. But first let's consider the phenomenon of repression.
Where does
it come from?
Repression
I remember a mother telling me proudly how she had stopped
the temper tantrums in her little fifteen month old. The "wise"
family doctor suggested that she splash ice water in the child's
face when he started to have a tantrum. It worked beautifully
he never had another tantrum. At the ripe age offifteen months
he had learned the technique of repression. He had been pro-
grammed to repress anger because it produced very unpleasant
consequences, and he would carry that dubious talent with
him throughout his life. Now when confronted with the mul-
titude of frustrating, annoying, sometimes enraging things that
happen to people every day, this man automatically internalizes
his natural anger, and when that anger collects and builds up,
he will have TMS or some such physical reaction in response
to
it.
The story illustrates one ofthe sources ofthe need to repress:

The Psychology ofTMS
45
innocent parental influence. This may be the most common
reason for learning to repress. In an attempt to make good
people of their children, parents may inadvertendy induce the
conditions for psychological difficulty later in life.
When you think about
it, there are many reasons why we
repress anger,
all logical and mostiy unconscious. Everyone
wants to be liked or loved; no one enjoys disapproval, so we
repress unlovable behavior. We would hate to admit
it, but
unconsciously we fear reprisal. The cultural imperatives offam-
ily and society provide strong motivation not to show anger;
this becomes deeply imbedded,
starting
as
it does
in early
childhood. We realize,
all unconsciously, that anger
is often
inappropriate, springing from irritants which ought not make
us angry, and so we repress. Instinctively we feel that anger is
demeaning, and perhaps even more powerful, we feel a loss
of control when we are angry, and that is something the TMS
personality finds hard to take. All of this
is unconscious and
thus we are unaware of our need to repress the anger. Instead
we may experience a physical symptom, TMS or something
gastrointestinal, for example.
I do that a lot. I have learned that heartburn means that I'm
angry about something and don't know
it. So I think about
what might be causing the condition, and when
I come up
with the answer the heartburn disappears. It is remarkable how
well buried the anger usually is. Generally for me it is some-
thing about which I am annoyed but have no idea how much
it has angered me. Sometimes it is something that is so loaded
emotionally, I don't come up with the answer for a long time.
After
a seventeen-year experience working with TMS
it
seems clear that, in our culture at least, we all generate anxiety
and anger and that, in any culture, human beings repress po-
tentially problematic emotions. Put another way, the psycho-
logical conditions that lead to psychophysiologic reactions like
TMS, stomach ulcers and colitis are universal; they only vary
in degree. Those at the upper end of the severity spectrum,

46
Heeding Back Pain
with more intense symptoms, we call neurotic, but in fact we
are all more or less neurotic, making the term meaningless.
The concepts of repression and the unconscious are closely
bound together. They were first put on a sound, scientific basis
by Freud. There is a wonderful metaphor of the unconscious
in Peter Gay's excellent biography of Freud, Freud: A Life for
Our Time (New York: Norton, 1988), p. 128: "Rather, the
unconscious
proper
resembles
a maximum-security
prison
holding anti-social inmates languishing for years or recendy
arrived, inmates harshly treated and heavily guarded, but barely
kept under control and forever attempting
to
escape"
(italics
added).
The emotional phenomena that have been described in this
chapter are the "anti-social inmates" of the unconscious. We
seem to have a built-in mechanism for avoiding what is emo-
tionally unpleasant, which
is the reason for repression. But
there appears to be an equally strong force in the mind working
to bring those feelings to consciousness ("forever attempting
to escape") and that is the reason for reinforcements, for what
psychoanalysts call a defense.
A short time ago I saw a woman who told the most inter-
esting story. After
I had examined her and told her she had
TMS and what it meant, she said that the pain had begun after
she invited an older
sister to take
a trip to Europe,
at her
expense. She began to worry about whether the sister would
have a good time, felt that it was her responsibility to see that
she did, and then got angry and resentful about having to feel
that way. She further reported that she began to dream about
her mother and sister and to recall her teenage resentments
against them, based on the feeling (no doubt unjustified) that
they "ganged up on her—to be good," and that she was ex-
cluded from their close relationship. All of this was enhanced
by the fact that she felt her father, with whom she had been
very close, had abandoned her—he died when she was eleven.
This
is the kind of thing from which TMS often
arises:
anxiety, anger, resentment, with roots that go all the way back

The Psychology ofTMS
47
to childhood.
I thought it remarkable of her to have come up
with all that important psychological material with just a hint
from me.
The universality of these psychological phenomena
is sup-
ported by the strangely ignored fact that over 80 percent of
the U.S. population has a history of these pain syndromes and
that their incidence has increased geometrically over the last
thirty years. Back and neck pain syndromes are the first cause
of worker absenteeism in
this country.
It
is estimated that
somewhere around $56 billion are expended annually in the
United States on the ravages of back pain. This virtual epi-
demic of pain syndromes can only be properly explained on
the basis of a universal psychophysiological process.
PHYSICAL DEFENSES AGAINST
REPRESSED EMOTIONS
For many years
I was under the impression that TMS was a
kind of physical expression or discharge of the repressed emo-
tions just described. In fact, this
is what
I suggested in the
first edition of this book.
I had been aware since the early
1970s that these common back and neck pain syndromes were
due to repressed emotions. Eighty-eight percent of a large
group of patients with TMS had a history of other tension-
related disorders, like stomach ulcers, colitis, tension headache
and migraine headache. But the idea of TMS
as a physical
manifestation of nervous tension was somehow unsatisfactory
and incomplete. Most important,
it did not explain the
re-
peated observation that making a patient aware of the role of
the pain as participant in a psychological process would lead
to cessation of pain, to a "cure."
It was a psychoanalyst colleague, Dr. Stanley Coen, who
suggested in the course of our working on a medical paper
together that the role of the pain syndrome was not to express

48
Healing Back Fain
the hidden emotions but to prevent them from becoming con-
scious. This, he explained,
is what
is referred to as a defense.
In other words, the pain ofTMS (or the discomfort of a peptic
ulcer, of colitis, of tension headache, or the terror of an asth-
matic attack)
is created in order to distract the attention of
the sufferer from what
is going on in the emotional sphere.
It is intended to focus one's attention on the body instead of
the mind.
It is a response to the need to keep those terrible,
antisocial, unkind, childish, angry,
selfish feelings
(the
pris-
oners) from becoming conscious. It follows from this that far
from being a physical disorder in the usual sense, TMS is really
part of a psychological process.
Defenses against repressed emotions work by diverting one's
attention to something other than the emotions that are being
kept hidden in the unconscious. Patients have different met-
aphors to describe the process: that the defense acts as a cam-
ouflage; that
it is a diversion or distraction. To be successful
it must occupy one's attention and it works even better if you
are totally preoccupied or obsessed by whatever
it
is. That is
why physical defenses are so good: they have the ability to
really grab one's
attention,
particularly
if they
are
painful,
frightening and disabling. This
is exacriy what happens with
TMS.
The common back, neck and shoulder pain syndromes have
reached epidemic proportions in the United States over the
past thirty years because they have become the preferred de-
fense
against the repressed emotions described above. The
mark of a good camouflage
is that
it will not be recognized
for what
it
is, that no one will know that something is being
hidden. Virtually no one suffering from them thinks that these
pain syndromes are related to emotional factors. On the con-
trary, almost everyone thinks they are due to injury or a variety
of congenital and degenerative abnormalities of the
spine.
There
is another group of disorders that are part of the TMS
repertoire and are thought to be due to soft tissue pathology
(fibromyalgia, fibrositis, myofasciitis, among others), but these

The Psychology ofTMS
49
too
are
attributed to
injury, muscle incompetence and the
like—the perfect camouflage. As long as the person's attention
remains focused on the pain syndrome, there is no danger that
the emotions will be revealed.
It has been a recurrent observation of mine that the more
painful the repressed emotion, the more severe the pain of
TMS has been. The patient who
is found to be harboring
enormous anger as a result of childhood abuses, for example,
usually has severe, disabling pain, and the pain disappears only
when that person has an opportunity to express the terrible,
festering rage that has occupied his or her unconscious for
years—another example of the potential of anger to initiate
the pain of TMS.
EQUIVALENTS OF TMS
As has been suggested, other physical disorders may serve the
same purpose
as TMS. Here
is a
list of some of the most
common ones:
Pre-ulcer states
Tension headache
Peptic ulcer
Migraine headache
Hiatus hernia
Eczema
Spastic colon
Psoriasis
Irritable bowel syndrome
Acne, hives
Hay fever
Dizziness
Asthma
Ringing in the ears
Prostatitis
Frequent urination
All of these disorders should be treated by one's regular
physician. Though they may be serving a psychological pur-
pose they must be investigated and treated medically. Hope-
fully, the patient will also receive some counseling.
Each of these physical conditions serves equally to
assist
repression. The more
that
practitioners
identify them
as

50
Healing Back Pain
"purely physical" the more they assist in the defense mecha-
nism, which means the continuation of the pain, ulcer, head-
ache or whatever is going on. As long as the defense works it
will continue.
Physical (as opposed to psychological) defenses against re-
pressed emotions are undoubtedly the most common because
they are so successful. They are also very effective since a patient
can transfer from one to another. For example, excellent drugs
have been found to reverse the pathology of peptic ulcer. As
a result, the mind simply shifts to another physical disorder.
One man in his midforties told me that ten years before he
had started to have trouble with his low back; after many years
it was relieved by surgery. A few months after the operation
he began to have stomach ulcer problems, and that went on
for almost two years. The doctor tried a number ofmedications
but just couldn't get rid of the ulcer. Finally
it stopped and
shortly thereafter the patient began to have neck and shoulder
pain; it had been going on for almost two years and so he had
come to see me.
The back surgery and ulcer treatment didn't
alleviate his
basic problem; they merely acted as placebos and mandated a
shift in the location of his physical symptoms.
The Peptic Ulcer Story
The ulcer story is interesting. There has been a decline in the
incidence of peptic ulcer in the United States and Canada over
the past twenty to thirty years, due in part to the effective
drugs that have been developed.
For a better explanation, however,
I am indebted to col-
umnist Russell Baker, who asked in one of his Sunday columns
in the New York Times Magazine (August 16, 1981), "Where
Have All the Ulcers Gone?" Mr. Baker pointed out that people
seemed to be getting fewer ulcers. The article set me to spec-
ulating that since everyone, doctors and laymen
alike, had

The Psychology ofTMS
51
come to realize that ulcers really meant tension, they no longer
served the purpose of hiding tension, so fewer people devel-
oped them. Could this be the reason why neck, shoulder and
back pains have become so common
in recent years?
Is
it
possible that these
are now much
better hiding places
for
tension than the stomach?
MIND AND BODY
It
is my impression that virtually any organ or system in the
body can be used by the mind as a defense against repressed
emotionality. These include disorders of the immune system,
such
as hay
fever, or frequent respiratory or genitourinary
infections. An academic urologist ofmy acquaintance has said
that over 90 percent of his cases of prostatitis
are due to
tension. I have a patient who suffers from constant dry mouth,
the result of tension-induced constriction of his salivary ducts.
Laryngitis may be of emotional origin; ophthalmologists tell
us that tension-induced visual difficulties are common, and on
and on. To repeat, all symptoms should be thoroughly inves-
tigated to rule out structural, infectious or neoplastic processes.
This subject is reviewed in more detail in the chapter on mind
and body.
While it is wise to rule out so-called organic disorders, the
diagnosis of psychophysiologic conditions should be made
positively and not by exclusion. A diagnosis by exclusion
is
not a diagnosis. It says, "I don't know what this is and therefore
it's
probably
tension
induced."
Rather
the
diagnostician
I
should say, "Now that I have eliminated the possibility that
there is a tumor or cancer I can proceed with confidence since
this physical condition
I am looking at has
all the signs and
symptoms of an emotionally induced process." That is rarely
done, however, for most practicing physicians either do not
recognize the disorder as psychophysiologic, or
if they do,
-—

52
Healing Back Pain
The Role ofFear in TMS
Severity of TMS
is measured not only by the intensity of the
pain but by the degree of physical disability that exists. What
things
is the person afraid of or unable to do? Disability may
be more important than pain because it defines the individual's
ability to function personally, professionally, socially and ath-
letically.
In the long run fear and preoccupation with physical
re-
strictions are more effective as a psychological defense than
pain. A severe attack of pain may be over in a few days, but
if the person is afraid to do things for fear of inducing another
attack or because he or she has found that the activity will
invariably bring on pain, even if it is not an acute attack, then
the preoccupation with the body is continuous and the defense
is working all the time. In the majority of patients with whom
I work this is the most important factor. Occasionally I have
a patient who says that he or she has no physical restrictions,
that pain is the only problem. But such patients are rare; most
patients are afraid of physical activity, which tends to perpet-
uate the problem by inducing further anxiety and often leads
to depression as well. What one sees is truly a physicophobia, a
fear of physical activity.
The degree of preoccupation with symptoms
is a measure
of the severity of the problem. Many patients report that the
syndrome dominates their lives while others are clearly ob-
sessed by the disorder. It is the first thing they think of when
they awaken in the morning and the last at night before sleep
comes.
A young woman with whom
I was working said one day
that she was "terrified of the physical pain." It was clear as we
talked, however, that she was really terrified about emotional
things and the pain syndrome had allowed her to avoid them.
It has been my experience that the overall severity of the

The Psychology ofTMS
53
:>ain syndrome, including obsessional components,
is a good
?uide to the importance of the underlying emotional state of
die patient. By importance I mean how much anger and anxiety
Jiere are, and how severe the traumas of early
life are that
lave contributed to that person's current psychological state.
People who were abused as children, emotionally or physically,
but especially sexually, tend to have enormous reservoirs of
anxiety and anger. This
is one of the
first things
I think of
when I see someone who has a particularly severe TMS. The
physical symptoms are the means by which they remain out
jf contact with some terrible, frightening, deeply buried feel-
ings. Those words are not exaggerations—there
is great fear
and probably enormous rage festering in their minds that they
dare not acknowledge. Such patients will
tell you that they
understand why the pain will not leave, for when they begin
to get close to those buried feelings they are panic stricken
and can proceed no further. They invariably require psycho-
therapy as part of the therapeutic program.
On the other hand, in the great majority of people with
TMS, about 95 percent, the anxiety level and the reasons for
it are much milder and they experience no emotional reaction
when the pain disappears. One has the impression in these
cases that the mind has overreacted to the anger and anxiety
and the defense wasn't necessary in the first place.
What has been described
is universal in our culture; only
the degree of repressed emotionality varies. And in our culture,
nature has created a mechanism whereby we can avoid being
aware of those bad feelings—it gives us physical symptoms.
Fortunately there
is
a way of stopping what
is
clearly a
maladaptive response for most of us. Logic tells us that the
brain
is reacting in an infantile fashion. However, my work
with TMS has demonstrated that the brain has other attributes
and can reverse the process that leads to physical symptoms.
Fear
is pervasive. Anything that heightens anxiety will in-
crease the severity of symptoms. One of my patients reported
that she left the doctor's office in a state of shock after having

54
Healing Back Pain
been told that the lower end of her spine was degenerating.
She said she almost fainted in the street and that her pain was
much worse after the visit to the doctor.
A young man in his twenties, with the physique of a football
player, told of how he was the strong one in the family busi-
ness. One day he decided to accompany his father on a visit
to a back practitioner since he had experienced some mild low
back pain while brushing his teeth. X rays were taken and he
was told that there was a malalignment of the lower end of
the spine, whereupon his mild symptoms got worse. When
the pain persisted he was advised to see a medical specialist,
a CT scan (see page 24) was done that showed a herniated
disc, and he was now advised that he had a serious problem
and that he must do no more heavy lifting, never play bas-
ketball again (one of his great loves) and generally be very
careful. He was devastated. Though he had started out with
mild low back pain, he now had severe pain every day and
was greatly limited in his work and life. He had become dis-
abled, thanks to the structural diagnoses that had been made
and
all that they implied. He now believed there was some-
thing seriously wrong with his spine and that he would never
again be able to
lift a heavy weight or play sports. When
I
saw him in consultation he was profoundly depressed.
Fortunately, he had TMS. He responded well to treatment
and has been living a normal
life again
(including playing
basketball).
There are many things about having back pain that stimulate
fear. The American public
is now convinced that the back
is
a fragile, delicate structure, easily injured and perpetually vul-
nerable. There are dozens of dos and don'ts: don't bend, don't
lift, lift with a straight back, don't sit on a soft chair or couch,
don't swim the crawl or breast stroke, don't wear high heels,
don't arch your back (which is what the crawl, the breast stroke
and high heels do), sleep on a hard mattress, don't run, no
vigorous sports,
etc. ad nauseam. A large group of my suc-
cessfully treated patients (a few thousand) have demonstrated

The Psychology ofTMS
55
that these are not valid instructions. All they succeed in doing
is help perpetuate the pain syndrome and make life hell.
There
is fear of recurrent attacks. Anyone who has had a
severe back attack cannot help but live in terror of the next
one. Ironically, by contributing to a high level of anxiety this
fear almost guarantees that another attack will come sooner
or later.
Anxiety and anger are enhanced by the perception that one
is an inadequate parent, spouse, sexual partner, worker, home-
maker or whatever else you do in
life. You can't go to the
movies, theater, concert or restaurant because you can't sit for
long. Your woe is double if you are self-employed.
The sad reality is that the patient with back pain is a prisoner
of pervasive fear—and fear is a prime perpetuator of the pain
syndrome.
Coping
I have heard it said that people get stress-induced pain because
they can't cope. It is quite the opposite; TMS occurs because
they cope too well. Coping requires that we repress emotions
that might interfere with whatever we are trying to do and
TMS exists in order to maintain repression of those emotions.
Someone I saw recendy, a high-powered businessman, told
me that he can never say no to friends and family who ask
him to do things for them because saying no to him means
defeat. Saying yes, and going ahead and accomplishing what
he was asked to do,
is like winning, no matter what
it may
cost him emotionally. He is a coper par excellence and a prime
candidate for TMS. This
also
illustrates some of the other
characteristics of the TMS personality: the need to be loved,
admired, respected; the drive to achieve; and the intense com-
petitiveness. We pay a price for coping—we're great on the
outside and we suffer on the inside.

56
Healing Back Pain
Rejecting the Diagnosis
It
is an unfortunate fact that most people would reject the
diagnosis of TMS
if it were presented to them. This
is not
surprising, for there remains a strong prejudice in our society
regarding anything having to do with psychological problems
and psychotherapy.
It doesn't matter that the overwhelming
majority of such "problems"
are minor or that millions of
people have psychotherapy every year. Emotional difficulties
appear to
fall into the same category as
racial and religious
prejudice.
Judging from the politics of running for public office, the
events of recent years suggest that society has done better in
overcoming
its racial and religious phobias than
it has with
psychology. We elected John Kennedy. But we have learned
from the electoral process in recent years that any hint of a
psychological history
is
still the
kiss of death for someone
running for high public office. Cruel paradox, for the contem-
porary political scene suggests that many politicians would
profit gready from psychotherapy. Under the circumstances it
is very unlikely that a politician would acknowledge having
TMS.
Similarly, most athletes would reject the diagnosis since psy-
chological syndromes are equated with weakness, and athletes
have an image of strength and indomitability to preserve.
I
know of a few who have been referred to me but have never
come.
Of course, the same prejudice is strong in medicine. Doctors
prefer to treat physical disorders; they feel insecure when con-
fronted with patients who have emotional symptoms. Their
usual response
is to prescribe a medication and hope that the
patients will feel better. Even the field of psychiatry now has
a large segment of practitioners who prefer to treat primarily
with drugs. And
I know of a number of psychiatrists who

The Psychology ofTMS
57
rejected the concept of TMS when it was suggested as a pos-
sible explanation for their back pain.
On the other hand, people with physical symptoms rarely
encounter such prejudices. Medical insurance will pay for the
most elaborate diagnostic and therapeutic procedures but most
policies exclude or sharply limit payment for psychotherapy.
Thousands of dollars will be given for an organ transplant to
preserve life but peanuts assigned for therapy that will improve
the quality of life.
Little wonder that the mind develops strategies to avoid the
experience and appearance of emotional
difficulty. Uncon-
sciously, we would rather have a physical pain than acknowl-
edge any kind of emotional turmoil.
I discussed this with a patient of mine, who made a cogent
observation. She said, "If you ask people to ease up on you
because you're emotionally overloaded, don't look for a sym-
pathetic response; but tell them you've got pain or some other
physical symptom and they immediately become responsive
and solicitous." How right she
is. It is perfectly acceptable to
have a physical problem in our culture, but people tend to shy
away from anything that has to do with the emotions.
It
is
one more reason why the mind will choose a physical rather
than an emotional manifestation when confronted with un-
pleasant emotional phenomena.
IS TMS WORLDWIDE?
From time to time
I have been asked if there are people any-
where in the world who don't get TMS. Dr. Kirkaldy-Wallis,
a British-trained physician who worked in Kenya for twenty-
two years, provided the answer. He reported
at
a medical
meeting in 1988 that back pain was very rare in indigenous
Africans but was just as common in Caucasians and Asians as
it is in the United States and Canada. He attributed this partly

58
Heeding Back Fain
to cultural differences, positing that Africans didn't seem to
generate anxiety as we do. Entirely logical.
THERE'S NOTHING NEW
As the details of this disorder were emerging many years ago I
found it hard to believe that no one had ever seen this problem
before. A search ofthe medical literature turned up an article in
a 1946 issue of the New EnglandJournal ofMedicine by a Major
Morgan Sargent describing a large population of returning Air
Force personnel who had backache. Dr. Sargent, not a psychi-
atrist, reported that 96 percent of a large group had psycholog-
ically induced pain, and then he went on to describe what was
clearly TMS. It was a sign of the times that Dr. Sargent's paper
was accepted for publication in the journal. It would probably
now be rejected as "unscientific." (I shall elaborate on changing
attitudes about mind-body interactions in chapter 7.)
THE SOLUTION
It is at this point that the patient will say, "All right, you've
convinced me. I understand why I've got this pain. Now how
in the world do I change my personality, solve my problems
(especially the insoluble ones, like my ninety-year-old mother),
stop generating anger and anxiety, and stop repressing my
feelings?"
In fact, Mother Nature has been extremely kind in this in-
stance, for the solution doesn't require any of those difficult
transformations in the majority of cases. To be sure, a small
number of patients will have to be in psychotherapy to recover,
but they represent less than 5 percent of the total. The rest
will get better simply by learning all about TMS and changing
their perceptions about their backs. Does
it sound simple? It
is and it isn't, as the treatment chapter will detail.

3
The Physiology
of TMS
The word physiology refers to the way the various systems and
organs of the body work. All biological systems are extremely
complicated and the higher the animal on the evolutionary
scale the more complicated the physiology. This is particularly
true with TMS because this disorder is the result of an inter-
action between the mental-emotional and the physical spheres
of human biology. Medical science has learned an enormous
amount about the physiology of most biologic systems in the
last one hundred years, and about the chemistry and physics
of the human body, but virtually nothing
is known about
interactions between the mind and body, which may be of
critical importance in understanding states of both health and
disease. TMS appears to be a classic example of mind-body
interaction, but we do not understand the chemistry, physics
or cell biology of how emotions can stimulate physical reac-
tions—and yet they do. Here is my concept of how it works
in TMS.
59

60
Healing Back Pain
THE AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM
The physiology of TMS begins in the brain. Here repressed
emotions
like anxiety and anger set in motion a process in
which the autonomic nervous system causes
a reduction in
blood flow to certain muscles, nerves, tendons or ligaments,
resulting in pain and other kinds ofdysfunction in these tissues.
The autonomic nervous system
is a subsystem of the brain
that has the
responsibility for controlling
all of the body's
involuntary functions. It determines how fast the heart beats,
how much acid is secreted into the stomach for digestive pur-
poses, how rapidly one breathes, and a host of other moment-
to-moment
physiologic
processes
that
keep
our
bodies
functioning optimally under everyday
circumstances
or
in
emergencies. The so-called fight or flight reaction that all an-
imals share, particularly important in lower animals, is directed
by the autonomic system. In order to meet the emergency
every organ and system in the body is properly prepared. For
some systems
it means total cessation of activity so that the
body's resources can be mobilized to deal with the danger
more effectively. Typically, most of the body's nutritive and
excretory activities are shut down, the heart beats more rapidly,
and blood
is shunted away from less important functions so
as to be available in larger quantities for systems that are crucial
to escape or fight, like the muscles. The critical importance of
the autonomic system of nerves is obvious.
The autonomic system controls the circulation of blood and
does
it with the most exquisite precision.
It can increase or
decrease the flow of blood wherever
it chooses and usually
does so for good reasons, as described above. But what the
system does in TMS we have characterized as an abnormal
autonomic activity. It has no useful purpose in the usual sense.
It
is not contributing to normal daily function or preparing
the body for fight or flight. However,
it
is responding to a

The Physiology ofTMS
61
psychological need. But we consider what happens to be aber-
rant because it results in pain and other distressing symptoms.
OXYGEN DEPRIVATION-
THE PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF TMS
We have postulated that in TMS the autonomic system selec-
tively decreases blood flow in certain muscles, nerves, tendons
and ligaments in response to the presence of repressed emo-
tions like anxiety and anger. This state is known as ischemia,
that is, the tissue involved is getting less than its normal com-
plement of blood. This means that there will be less oxygen
available to those tissues than they are accustomed to and the
result will be symptoms—pain, numbness, tingling and some-
times weakness. These things happen because of the critical
importance of oxygen in all physiologic processes. When it is
reduced below its normal levels one can expect a reaction that
will signal that fact.
What is difficult to understand is why the autonomic system
should react so as to cause pain and other unpleasant symptoms
when its normal function is to keep the body operating at an
optimal level regardless of what's going on around
it. This is
clearly highly unusual but suggests that there must be some
pressing need for the reaction. As we have suggested earlier,
that need is to deflect the person's attention away from those
very unpleasant, often painful emotions that the mind is trying
to keep repressed.
It
is as though the mind had decided that
a physical pain is preferable to an emotional one. When viewed
in this light the process
is not so illogical.
THE CASE FOR OXYGEN DEPRIVATION
How does one know that oxygen deprivation
is responsible
for the pain?
First, many of the body's reactions to tension

62
Healing Back Fain
and anxiety are the result of abnormal autonomic reactions.
The best known
is peptic ulcer
(a common operation years
ago was to cut the autonomic nerves to the stomach as treat-
ment for an ulcer), but so are spastic colitis, tension headache,
migraine headache and a host of others. Therefore,
it was
thought logical that the pathological physiology ofTMS might
also originate in the autonomic system.
If the autonomics were to be involved in TMS, the best way
that they could produce mischief in muscles and nerves would
be through the circulatory system. The small blood vessels
bringing blood to these tissues (arterioles) need only be con-
stricted a bit, less blood would reach the area, the tissues would
be mildly oxygen deprived and pain would result.
One body ofevidence that the physiologic alteration in TMS
is oxygen deprivation is clinical. It has long been recognized
that heat, introduced into muscle by diathermy or ultrasound
machines, will relieve back pain temporarily. So will deep mas-
sage and active exercise of the muscles involved. All three of
these physical measures
are known to
increase blood flow
through muscle. Increased blood flow means more oxygen,
and
if that relieves pain
it
is logical to assume that oxygen
deprivation was responsible for the pain.
There is also laboratory evidence for this concept. In 1973
two German research workers, H. G. Fassbender and K. Weg-
ner, reported finding microscopic changes
in the nuclei of
biopsied muscles from back pain patients suggesting oxygen
deprivation in "Morphologie und Pathogenese des Weichteil-
rheumatismus," Z. Rheumaforsch (Vol. 32, p. 355).
For additional evidence on the
critical role of oxygen in
TMS we are indebted to a group of research workers who
have demonstrated in their laboratories in recent years that
muscle oxygenation is low in patients suffering from a disorder
known as primary fibromyalgia. Typical of these reports is one
published in the Scandinavian Journal ofRheumatology in 1986
(Vol. 15, p. 165) by N. Lund, A. Bengtsson and P. Thorborg
titled "Muscle Tissue Oxygen
Pressure
in Primary
Fibro-

The Physiology ofTMS
63
myalgia." Using an elegant new laboratory tool, they were able
to measure muscle oxygen content with great accuracy and
found that it was low in the painful muscles of patients with
fibromyalgia.
What this means for the etiology (cause) of TMS, as I have
long maintained, is that fibromyalgia, also known as fibrositis
and myofibrositis (and to some as myofasciitis and myofascial
pain), is synonymous with TMS. I have treated a large number
of patients who came with the diagnosis of fibromyalgia; their
medical histories and physical examinations were consistent
with severe TMS. As proof that the diagnosis was correct, they
recovered completely. Therefore,
it is reasonable to maintain
that the finding of mild oxygen deprivation in the muscles of
patients with fibromyalgia supports the hypothesis that the
cause of pain in TMS
is the same—oxygen debt.
As mentioned earlier, TMS manifests itself in many ways,
both qualitatively and quantitatively, and it is clear that what
is called fibromyalgia is one of the ways in which TMS occurs.
These patients are among those who suffer the most severe
conditions, for they tend to have pain in many different mus-
cles and to suffer from insomnia, anxiety and depression as
well as generalized fatigue. All these manifestations are inter-
preted as evidence of a higher level of repressed emotionality,
primarily anger and, therefore, more severe symptoms.
Most contemporary medical
investigators
cannot
accept
such an explanation since
it violates their basic presumption
that the etiologic explanation for physical abnormalities must
be in the body
itself. They cannot conceive of the idea that
something like back pain might originate in the brain. And
therein lies a great tragedy for the patient, for as long as this
conceptual recalcitrance persists the patient will continue to
be misdiagnosed.

64
Heeding Back Pain
THE CONSEQUENCES
OF OXYGEN DEPRIVATION
Muscle
Oxygen-deprived muscles are painful for two reasons that are
known and perhaps others that are beyond our ability to com-
prehend.
Muscle spasm is the first and most dramatic. It is responsible
for the excruciating pain that people experience when they are
having an acute attack, as described in the first chapter. How-
ever, once the attack has passed the muscle
is not in spasm.
In the thousands of patients I have examined through the years
I have rarely found the involved muscles to be in spasm.
The second mechanism, suggested by Dr. Holmes and Dr.
Wolfe in a paper published in 1952
titled "Life Situations,
Emotions and Backache," published in Psychosomatic Medicine
(Vol.
14, p. 18), was that the chemistry of the muscles was
altered in these patients and that they experienced pain because
of a buildup of waste chemicals from the metabolism of lactic
acid.
It is of great interest that both muscle spasm and this chem-
ical buildup can be observed in long-distance runners, whose
muscles suffer from oxygen deprivation. The presence of mus-
cle pain, either felt spontaneously or induced by the pressure
of an examiner's hand, means that the muscle is mildly oxygen
deprived. It does not mean that the muscle is "tense." It needs
to be emphasized that this oxygen deprivation is usually low
level and does not, therefore, damage tissue. This is particularly
true of muscle.

The Physiology ofTMS
65
Trigger Points
The term triggerpoints, which has been around for many years,
refers to the pain elicited when pressure is applied over various
muscles in the neck, shoulders, back and buttocks. There
is
some controversy over what
precisely
is
painful, but most
would agree that
it
is something in the muscle. Rheumatol-
ogists, who have
taken
the
lead
in
studying fibromyalgia
(TMS), appear to avoid using the term, probably because of
its association with other diagnoses through the years. I neither
use
it nor avoid
it, for I have concluded that these points of
tenderness are merely the central zones of oxygen deprivation.
Further, there
is evidence that some of these points of ten-
derness may persist for
life in TMS-susceptible people,
like
me, though there may be no pain.
In the first chapter the point was made that most patients
with TMS will have tenderness at six key points: the outer
aspect of both buttocks, both sides of the small of the back
(lumbar area) and the top of both shoulders. These tender
points, trigger points, call them what you will, are the hallmark
findings in TMS and they are the ones that tend to persist
after the pain is gone. It is an important part of the physiology
of TMS to know that the brain has chosen to implicate these
muscles in creating the syndrome we know as TMS.
Patients sometimes ask if breathing pure oxygen will relieve
the pain. This has been tried and, unfortunately, does not help.
If the brain intends to create a state of oxygen deprivation it
will do so regardless of how oxygen-rich the blood
is.
Nerve
Nerve tissue
is more sensitive and delicate than muscle.
It
is
likely that oxygen debt causes nerve pain because the reduced

66
Heeding Back Pain
level of oxygen threatens the integrity of the nerve, as it does
not in muscle. In other words, muscle can withstand a lot of
oxygen debt before it will be damaged, far beyond that which
occurs in TMS. More sensitive nerve tissue, however, is more
easily damaged and in order to warn the brain that something
is wrong, pain begins with very mild oxygen deprivation. We
postulate, then, that nerve pain in TMS
is a warning signal.
Other nerve symptoms are common in TMS. The person
may
experience
feelings
of numbness,
tingling,
pins
and
needles, burning, pressure and others less common. These sen-
sations and the pain are felt in that part of the body served by
the nerve.
Nerves are like wires connecting the brain with all parts of
the body. They transmit messages from the brain designed to
cause muscles to activate and move body parts. But they also
transmit messages in the opposite direction, bringing infor-
mation to the brain about what is going on in the body. For
example, if you stick yourself with a pin, impulses travel along
nerves informing the brain that something painful has hap-
pened.
If the nerve
is irritated or damaged anywhere along
the line, pain will be felt in that part of the body from which
these information messages would ordinarily originate. So, for
example,
if the
sciatic nerve
is oxygen deprived as
it passes
through the buttock muscle one may feel pain in any part of
the leg that is served by the sciatic nerve. Since it serves almost
the entire leg (one for each leg) there are many varieties of
sciatica. In some, sciatica means pain down the entire back of
the leg, in others down the side of the leg. Or the pain may
involve only part of the leg or foot, the thigh, the calf, front
or back, the top or the bottom of the foot. Sometimes there
is pain in the side of the thigh and then it jumps down to the
foot. In occasional cases there
is only nerve pain somewhere
in the leg or arm, without neck or back pain.
There are patients in whom the upper lumbar spinal nerves
are involved, in which case pain may be felt in the upper thigh,
groin or even the lower part of the abdomen. Though the

The Physiology ofTMS
67
genital organs are served by low sacral spinal nerves, one oc-
casionally sees a patient with scrotal or labial pain whose origin
is one of the upper lumbar spinal nerves. A full description of
which nerves in the upper or lower back may be involved
is
to be found in the first chapter.
The nerve fibers that transmit information to the brain are
known as sensory nerve fibers.
Motor fibers
travel in the opposite
direction. They bring
messages from the brain to the muscles that result in muscle
contraction
and,
therefore, movement. Muscle
contraction
means that the muscle shortens, which is how it moves a body
part. When muscle contracts powerfully and continuously
it
is said to be in spasm^ as described before. It is excruciatingly
painful, as
it is an abnormal state.
Most nerves, like the sciatic, are mixed nerves. That is, they
consist of both sensory and motor fibers. That is why damage
to or irritation of a nerve may result in both sensory and motor
symptoms, though not necessarily. In TMS one sees much
variation from patient to patient. There may be only sensory
symptoms (pain, tingling, numbness, burning, pressure) or,
less common, only motor symptoms (feelings of weakness or
real weakness). More often one sees both sensory and motor
symptoms.
Tendons and Ligaments
There is much about TMS that is mysterious and one of the
most difficult aspects of the syndrome to understand
is the
apparent involvement of tendons and ligaments. Tendonitis
of the elbow, shoulder or knee, for example, will often dis-
appear in the course oftreatment for TMS. It must be assumed,
therefore, that these are part of the syndrome. If that
is so,
what is the physiologic alteration responsible for the pain?
It has been generally assumed that tendonitis
is the result
of inflammation, but there is no evidence at all that this is so.

68
Healing Back Fain
Because it is part ofTMS one is tempted to think that oxygen
deprivation is at work. Though tendons have no blood vessels,
they are living tissue and, therefore, must be supplied with
nutrients and oxygen. It is reasonable to assume that the lack
of oxygen
is also responsible for tendon and ligament pain.
Whatever the mechanism,
it
is clear that these structures are
also involved in the charade mounted by the brain in the service
of avoiding anxiety and anger and it is very important to know
that tendonitis is one more part of the Tension Myositis Syn-
drome.
REVIEW
To review the physiology ofTMS: It begins with certain emo-
tional states that set in motion activity within the central ner-
vous system,
specifically the autonomic system, resulting in
local vasoconstriction and mild oxygen deprivation of certain
muscles, nerves, tendons and ligaments. This oxygen lack
is
responsible
for the pain
that
is
the primary manifestation
of TMS and the possibility of sensory abnormalities (numb-
ness, pins and needles) and motor deficits such as weakness or
tendon
reflex changes.
(There
is much greater detail about
which muscles, nerves, tendons and ligaments are affected in
chapter 1.)
Why the mind has chosen to implicate these muscles, nerves,
tendons and ligaments in TMS seems beyond our capacity to
comprehend at this time. Indeed,
it is likely that at this point
in the evolution of the human mind, we are incapable of un-
derstanding how the brain works generally, how
it compre-
hends and produces language, how
it thinks and remembers,
and so forth. Understanding the mechanism of TMS
is just
one more ofthe many imponderables ofhuman brain function.
Though
it may be of academic interest, knowing the phys-
iology of TMS with certainty is not essential. We know how
to stop the disorder, how to "cure"
it, for we know
its real

The Physiology ofTMS
69
cause. The chemical and physical changes that take place in
the muscles, nerves, tendons and ligaments that result in pain
and other symptoms are the consequences of a process initiated
in the brain for psychological reasons. Since any alteration of
normal physiology resulting in physical symptoms would serve
the same purpose, it is not important to know with precision
what is going on in these tissues. As we shall demonstrate in
the next chapter on the treatment of TMS, focusing on the
physiology and symptomatology of TMS
is actually counter-
productive, tending to perpetuate
rather than
alleviate the
problem.

4
The Treatment
of TMS
EARLY HISTORY
My treatment of TMS has evolved over the past seventeen
years in response to a clear-cut diagnostic concept—that the
pain syndromes are the result of the mind-body interaction.
When
it began to dawn on me that this was the
case, my
automatic reaction was to explain to the patient what I thought
was going on. At the same time, I prescribed physical therapy
for everybody, as I had always done. My reasoning was that
such therapy could not hurt and, since I believed that oxygen
deprivation was responsible for the symptoms,
it might ac-
tually be beneficial since all the modalities I prescribed tended
to increase the local circulation of blood.
As time went on something interesting emerged.
I found
that most of the
patients who got better were those who
accepted the idea that their pain was the result of emotional
factors. Some who improved remained skeptical of the diag-
nosis but responded well to the physical therapy.
It was also
apparent that some physical therapists were more successful
than others. Based on these observations, two therapeutic con-
clusions were reached:
70

The Treatment ofTMS
71
1. The most important factor in recovery
is that the person
must be made aware of what is going on; in other words,
that the information provided
is the "penicillin" for this
disorder.
2. Some patients will respond to physical therapy and/or the
physical therapist with a placebo reaction. As has been said
earlier a placebo reaction is fine, but it is usually temporary.
Our goal was to effect a complete and permanent cure.
The effectiveness of the placebo reaction was easy to un-
derstand but
I was mystified by the obvious importance of
informing the patient of what was going on. This was knowl-
edge therapy, and it appeared to make no sense at all. However,
I was delighted with
its effectiveness, and my cure rate was
distinctiy better. In addition
I
finally had the feeling that
I
knew what was going on despite my inability to explain
all
the details. That wasn't too upsetting, for after
all we were
dealing with a process ofthe brain and it is common knowledge
that little is known about how the brain works.
During this period I worked closely with a group of talented
physical
therapists who had learned
all about the Tension
Myositis Syndrome and combined
their physical treatment
with discussion of the psychological factors involved. They
functioned as surrogates for me as well as physical therapists.
It was a painful decision to stop using physical therapy later
on because I so appreciated the work of these dedicated profes-
sionals.
Also during those early years
I developed a close working
relationship with a small group of psychologists on the staff
of the Howard A. Rusk Institute of Rehabilitation Medicine,
an association that has continued to this day.
I learned a lot
of psychology from them and they have played an important
role in the treatment of those patients who needed psycho-
therapy
in order to get better. In essence we function
as a
team.
In 1979, perhaps later than I should have,
I began to bring

72
Heeding Back Fain
groups of patients together for what one might call lecture-
discussions. With each passing year it became increasingly ob-
vious that educating the patient about TMS was the crucial
therapeutic factor. Occasionally,
I would see a patient who
had been psychoanalyzed or had been in psychotherapy for a
long time but had a pain syndrome nevertheless. So
it was
clear that psychological insight was not sufficient to prevent
TMS. It wasn't until patients learned the facts about TMS that
the pain went away. Starting with four one-hour lectures, we
evolved to two two-hour sessions, the first ofwhich is devoted
to the physiology and diagnosis of TMS and the second to
the psychology of TMS and its treatment. The reason for the
lectures was clear—if the information was so important to
patients' recovery, then they had to be well educated about
TMS. More
specifically,
it was essential that patients knew
exactiy what they didn't have (all the structural diagnoses) and
what they did have (TMS). From a stricdy physical point of
view, TMS
is harmless; therefore, they had nothing to worry
about physically. All the prohibitions and admonitions were
unnecessary. Indeed, they actually contributed to the problem
by creating fear where none was appropriate.
CURRENT THERAPEUTIC CONCEPTS
If the purpose of the pain is to make one focus on the body,
and through these lectures the patient can be convinced to
ignore the bodily symptoms and think about psychological
things instead, haven't we made the pain syndrome useless?
It's a bit like blowing the cover on a covert operation. As
long as the person remains unaware that the pain
is serving
as a distraction,
it will continue to do so, undisturbed. But
the moment the realization sinks in (and
it must sink in, for
mere intellectual appreciation of the process
is not enough),
then the deception doesn't work anymore; pain stops, for there

The Treatment ofTMS
73
is no further need for the pain. And
it's the information that
gets the job done.
The illustration on page 74 should make the point clear. It
is in the brain, the organ of the mind, where the unacceptable
emotions described in the psychology chapter are generated,
hence the arrow up to the right. Straight above, the conscious
mind, or what might be called the "mind's eye," is represented.
It
is in order to prevent the conscious mind from becoming
aware of the unpleasant emotions that they are repressed, that
is, kept in the unconscious. It must be that something in the
mind
is fearful that they will not remain repressed, that they
are trying to come to consciousness, for
it
is decided that a
defense mechanism is necessary and, psychologically speaking,
a defense is anything that will distract the conscious mind (the
"mind's eye") from what is being repressed. So the brain cre-
ates TMS—the arrow to the
left. Now the person must pay
attention to
all the various manifestations of TMS and can
avoid the unpleasantness of experiencing those bad feelings on
the right.
This illustration is particularly useful in understanding why
one gets rid of TMS by learning about
it. If I can convince
the conscious mind that TMS
is not serious and not worthy
of its attention, better yet that
it
is a phony, a charade, and
that rather than fear it one should ridicule it, that most of the
structural diagnoses
are not valid and that the only things
worthy of one's attention are the repressed feelings, what has
been accomplished > We will have made the TMS useless;
it
will no longer have the ability to attract the attention of the
conscious mind; the defense
is a failure (the cover is blown,
the camouflage
is removed), which means the pain ceases.
If that
all sounds like something out of science fiction or
Grimm's fairy tales, one can only say that
it works and has
worked in a few thousand people over the last seventeen years.
Here's a striking story to illustrate the point. A woman from
out of town went through the program and had a good result.
Within a few weeks after the lectures her pain was gone and

74
Healing Back Fain
THE CONSCIOUS MIND
THE MIND'S EYE
How TMS diverts attention from the emotional to the physical
.

The Treatment ofTMS
75
she resumed all her old activities, including tennis and running.
One day about nine months after completing the program she
was out running and developed a pain in a new location, the
outer aspect of one of her hips, another manifestation ofTMS.
Later, she told me the details of the episode.
She saw her local doctor, who said she had bursitis in the
hip and put her through X rays, injections and medication.
She admitted that she was in a lot of pain—and had been for
three weeks—while talking on the phone, and that I was right
to scold her for following her doctor's regimen. After talking
to me, she said she stood for several minutes reflecting and
she got mad—really angry at herself and especially her brain
for having pulled that stunt—and she ended up having quite
a talk with her brain. Within two minutes the pain was totally
gone and had not recurred. Amazed at how quickly her pain
disappeared, she began to jog again, concentrating on the real
problem, unconscious anxiety about hurting herself during
exercise.
The point of this story is that the information was the cru-
cial factor and that
it worked so quickly because she had al-
ready
been
through
our
program
and
had
integrated
(meaning she had accepted at a deeper level) the concepts of
TMS. The pain would not have disappeared instantly if she
had not
already known about TMS. But because she did
know about it, because she had been through the lecture pro-
gram, the moment she realized that the hip pain was another
manifestation of TMS,
it disappeared because
it could no
longer successfully hold her attention as a legitimate physical
disorder and could no longer distract her from the world of
her emotions.
But then you might ask: "Why did she have a recurrence of
pain at all?"
The occurrence of pain in TMS always signifies the presence
of repressed bad feelings, like anger and anxiety.
"But your program is supposed to prevent this sort of thing
from happening; what happened here?"

76
Healing Back Pain
The fact that this lady developed pain in a new place tells
us that her brain was
still trying to use the TMS to hide
repressed feelings. I discussed this with her and we agreed that
if it happened again it might be wise to consider psychother-
apy. (See page 85 for a discussion ofwho needs psychotherapy
and who doesn't.)
Though
this
subject
has
already been
discussed
in
the
psychology chapter, it would not be amiss to repeat that there
are clearly opposing forces in the mind as to what will be the
ultimate
fate of these repressed emotions. There must be a
force (I can't find a better word) which is trying to bring these
feelings to consciousness, despite their unpleasant content. If
they were subconscious and destined to remain so there would
be no need for a diversionary process like TMS. The existence
of TMS suggests that something is trying to bring these bad
feelings to light. One might call this circular reasoning, except
that there is well-documented evidence in the psychology lit-
erature that people exhibit a wide variety of behaviors that are
designed to allow them to avoid unpleasant or painful emo-
tional experiences. A classic example is the germ phobia. The
person is obsessed with germs and washes his hands a hundred
times a day. (Some might call this a compulsion neurosis but
it is the fear of germs which produces the hand-washing com-
pulsion.) Illogical behavior like this has long been recognized
as a kind of substitute or displacement for strong, unconscious
feelings that the person cannot deal with, hence the preoc-
cupation with germs.
TMS serves the same purpose by keeping one's attention
focused on the body, as do a variety of other physical disorders
like tension headache, migraine, hay fever, eczema and heart
palpitation, to name a few.

The Treatment ofTMS
77
TREATMENT STRATEGIES
The treatment program rests on two pillars:
1. The acquisition of knowledge, of insight into the nature
of the disorder.
2. The ability to act on that knowledge and thereby change
the brain's behavior.
Think Psychological
So one must learn
all about TMS, what actually causes the
pain, and what part of the brain is responsible— all the things
covered in the physiology and manifestation chapters. Then
one reviews the psychology of the disorder, the fact that we
all tend to generate anger and anxiety in this culture, and that
the more compulsive and perfectionistic of us generate a lot.
What one must then do
is develop the habit of "thinking
psychological" instead of physical. In other words, I suggest
to patients that when they find themselves being aware of the
pain they must consciously and forcefully shift their attention
to something psychological, like something they are worried
about, a chronic family or financial problem, a recurrent source
of irritation, anything in the psychological realm, for that sends
a message to the brain that they're no longer deceived by the
pain. When that message reaches the depths of the mind, the
subconscious, the pain ceases.
That brings up an important point. Of course, everyone
wants the pain to go away immediately. Patients often say,
"All right, I understand very clearly what you're saying—why
doesn't the pain stop?"
The last lines of a poem by Edna St. Vincent Millay illustrate
the reason why the pain doesn't disappear quickly:

78
Healing Back Fain
Pity me that the heart is slow to learn
What the swift mind beholds at every turn.
If we substitute the words "subconscious mind" for "heart"
the point will be
clear. The conscious mind
is swift;
it can
grasp and accept things quickly. The subconscious
is slow,
deliberate, not quick to accept new ideas and change, which
is no doubt a very good thing. Were it not so, humans would
be very unstable animals. However, at times like these, when
we want things to change quickly, we are impatient with the
lumbering subconscious.
Well, how long does
it take for the pain to go? Though I
am reluctant to talk about numbers, experience has shown that
the majority will have resolution of most of their symptoms
in two to
six weeks
after the lectures. Patients are warned,
however, that the time may be prolonged if they count the
days or weeks or become discouraged if the pain isn't gone
when they think
it should be gone. Human beings are not
machines and there are many factors tending to vary the time
of resolution. How strong are the repressed emotions? How
much fear has the person built up over the years? How readily
can he or she repudiate the structural diagnoses with which
they came?
Talk to Tour Brain
Another useful strategy sounds silly at first, but has great merit.
Patients are encouraged to talk to their brains. So many pa-
tients reported having done this on their own with good results
that
I now routinely suggest
it, despite lingering feelings of
foolishness. What one
is doing
is consciously taking charge
instead of feeling the helpless, intimidated victim, which is so
common in people with this syndrome. The person is asserting
himself, telling the brain that he
is not going to put up with
this state of affairs—and
it works. Patients report that they

The Treatment ofTMS
79
can actually abort an episode of pain by doing this. The woman
whose case was described on pages 73-75 did just that and
experienced an immediate cessation of pain.
It's a very useful
strategy.
Resume Physical Activity
Perhaps the most important (but most
difficult) thing that
patients must do
is to resume
all physical activity, including
the most vigorous. This means overcoming the fear ofbending,
lifting, jogging,
playing
tennis
or any other
sport, and
a
hundred other common physical things. It means unlearning
all the nonsense about the correct way you are supposed to
bend,
lift,
sit, stand,
lie in bed, which swimming strokes are
good and bad, what kind of chair or mattress you must use,
shoes or corset or brace you must wear, and many other bits
of medical mythology.
The various health disciplines interested in the back have
succeeded in creating an army of the partially disabled in this
country with their medieval concepts of structural damage and
injury as the basis of back pain. Though
it
is often difficult,
every patient has to work through his or her fear and return
to full normal physical activity. One must do this not simply
for the sake of becoming a normal human being again (though
that
is a good enough reason physically and psychologically
by itself) but to liberate oneself from the fear of physical ac-
tivity, which is often more effective than pain in keeping one's
mind focused on the body. That
is the purpose of TMS, to
keep the mind from attending to emotional things. As Snoopy,
that great contemporary philosopher, once said, "There's noth-
ing like a little physical pain to keep your mind off your emo-
tional problems." Charles M. Schultz, the creator of Peanuts,
is clearly a perceptive man.
I now believe that the physical restrictions imposed by TMS
are much more important than the pain, thus making
it im-

80
Healing Back Fain
perative that the patient gradually overcome them. If patients
cannot do this they are doomed to have recurrences of pain.
A few pages back phobias were mentioned. The pervasive,
universal fear of physical activity in people with these pain
syndromes, especially of the low back, has prompted me to
suggest a new word
physicophobia. It is a powerful factor in
perpetuating low back pain syndromes.
It should be noted, parenthetically, that the advice to resume
normal physical activity, including the most vigorous, has been
given to a very large number ofpatients over the past seventeen
years.
I cannot recall one person who has subsequendy said
that this advice caused him or her to have further back trouble.
I suggest to patients that they begin the process of resuming
physical activity when they experience a significant reduction
in pain and when they are feeling confident about the diag-
nosis. To start prematurely only means that they will probably
induce pain, frighten themselves and retard the recovery pro-
cess. Patients are usually conditioned to expect pain with phys-
ical
activity
and
so
must
not
challenge
the
established
programmed patterns until they have developed a fair degree
of confidence in the diagnosis.
One of my patients, an attorney in his midthirties, had an
interesting experience in
this regard. He went through the
program uneventfully and in a few weeks was free of pain and
doing everything—except one thing. He was afraid to run.
He explained to me later that it had been drummed into his
head for so many years that running was bad for your back
that he simply couldn't get up the courage to try, though he
could do many things more strenuous than running. After
almost a year he decided that this was silly and he was going
to run. He did, and his pain returned. Now he was at a cross-
road; should he continue to run or back off) He called for my
advice but unfortunately I was on vacation and he had to make
his own decision. Wisely, he decided to bull
it through. He
continued to run and he continued to hurt. Then one night
he was awakened from sleep with
a very sharp pain
in the

The Treatment ofTMS
81
upper back, but his low back pain was gone. Knowing that
TMS often moves to different places during the process of
recovery, he decided that he had probably won, and he had.
Within a couple of days the upper back pain was gone too
and he has not had a recurrence of either upper or lower back
pain since that time.
One has to confront TMS, fight
it, or the symptoms will
continue. Losing one's fear and resuming normal physical ac-
tivity
is possibly the most important part of the therapeutic
process.
Discontinue All Physical Treatment
Another essential for full recovery is that all forms of physical
treatment or therapy must be abandoned. It is instructive to
consider that I did not stop prescribing physical therapy until
twelve or thirteen years after I began to make the diagnosis.
It took that long for me to fully break with all the old traditions
in which I had been schooled. Conceptually, prescribing phys-
ical therapy contradicts what we have found to be the only
rational way to treat the problem; that
is, by teaching, and
thereby invalidating, the process where it begins—in the mind.
Further, it had become obvious that some patients had put all
their confidence in the physical therapy (or therapist) and were
having placebo cures (see page 121), which meant that sooner
or later they would be in pain again. The principle is that one
must renounce any structural explanation either for the pain
or its cure, or the symptoms will continue. Manipulation, heat,
massage, exercise and acupuncture
all presuppose a physical
disorder that can be treated by some physical means. Unless
that whole concept is repudiated, the pain and other symptoms
continue.
Patients are usually shocked when
it is suggested that they
stop the exercises and stretching they have been taught to do
for their backs. But
it
is essential in order to establish firmly

82
Healing Back Pain
in the mind what is important. Exercise for the sake of good
health
is of course something else, and
it
is strongly encour-
aged.
Review the Daily Reminders
This
is an important strategy but one must be careful that it
does not become a ritual. Patients are given a
list of twelve
key thoughts, and it is suggested that at least once a day they
set aside fifteen minutes or so when they can relax and quietly
review them. They are called daily reminders.
The pain is due to TMS, not to a structural abnormality.
The direct reason for the pain is mild oxygen deprivation.
TMS
is
a harmless condition, caused by my repressed
emotions.
The principal emotion is my repressed anger.
TMS exists only to distract my attention from the emo-
tions.
Since my back is basically normal there is nothing to fear.
Therefore, physical activity is not dangerous.
And I must resume all normal physical activity.
I will not be concerned or intimidated by the pain.
I will shift my attention from the pain to emotional issues.
I intend to be in control—not my subconscious mind.
I must think psychological at all times, not physical.
By the end of the second lecture-discussion
it
is assumed
that the information about TMS has been intellectually pro-
cessed.
Patients
are then urged to give
this information an
opportunity to "sink in," to be integrated, to be accepted at
a subconscious level, for conscious acceptance, though essen-
tial as a first step, is not sufficient to reverse the TMS. Patients
are instructed to give it two to four weeks and then call me if
they have not made sufficient progress.
If they have not,
I

The Treatment ofTMS
83
arrange either to see them in my office or, more commonly,
attend a small group meeting composed of patients like them-
selves (who have made little or no progress) or those having
recurrences after having been free of pain for months or years.
It
is the purpose of these sessions to uncover the reason for
the recurrence or lack of progress.
SMALL GROUP FOLLOW-UP MEETINGS
The first thing to ascertain is that the patient understands and
accepts the diagnosis. Let's take a theoretical patient, a fifty-
year-old businessman. He comes to the meeting because he
hasn't improved after attending the lectures. Some of the pos-
sible reasons are:
1. He accepts 90 percent of the diagnosis but still has some
concerns that the herniated disc demonstrated on the CT
scan or MRI has something to do with the pain.
2. He finds it hard to believe that this thing can go away with
just an education program.
3. He accepts the diagnosis but can't get up the courage to
begin physical activity.
Mental impediments such as these allow the brain to con-
tinue the TMS since the man is still engaged with his symptoms
as a physical disorder. As long as he is in any way preoccupied
with what his body is doing, the pain will continue. His con-
fidence in the diagnosis needs to be built up so that he can
accept the fact that he has TMS.
The person sitting next to him
is a thirty-year-old home-
maker, wife and mother. She tells us she is no better since the
lectures but she
is not surprised because her
life remains as
hectic as ever, she
is perpetually tired and harassed, and she
never feels as though she has done as well as she should.
It
is pointed out to her that she will never cease being a

84
Healing Back Pain
perfectionist, that she will always have too much to do, but
that the secret of getting over TMS
is not changing oneself
but simply recognizing that the combination of the realities
of her life and personality cause her to generate an enormous
amount of anxiety and anger.
Yes, anger too. She has probably never acknowledged the
fact that although she adores her three
little
girls, she
is
si-
multaneously angry at them for what they require of her. The
idea that she could be subconsciously angry at her children is
outside of her experience. When she grasps the idea that the
cure
is in the acknowledgment of such unacceptable subcon-
scious feelings the pain will cease.
The man in the back row who next raises his hand is a forty-
five-year-old construction foreman who came through
the
program three years ago and had been doing fine until last
week—no pain, no physical restrictions, no problems. Then,
out of the blue, he developed an acute low back spasm and
now
is having severe
pain.
If he hadn't been through the
program he would really be scared. But he can't understand
why this happened.
"What's going on in your
life?"
I ask him. "Nothing in
particular," he says. "My wife
is fine, the children are doing
well, we don't have any health or financial problems." But the
occurrence of an acute spasm means that there has to be some-
thing psychological going on because TMS
is an emotional
barometer. So I continue to question him and finally it comes
out there have been problems on the job, difficulties with some
of the men he supervises and criticism from his superior.
"Nothing I can't handle," he says, but he doesn't realize that
though he's "handling"
it he's generating large quantities of
anxiety and anger in the process. There
is always important
emotional activity going on below the level of consciousness
and we have no way of knowing about
it, unless from expe-
rience we learn to suspect it and anticipate
it.
He leaves the meeting a litde wiser about how his emotional
insides work. The back pain will subside and hopefully he will

The Treatment ofTMS
85
think about his inner reactions the next time he is confronted
with a stressful situation.
The small group meetings have proven to be a valuable
therapeutic tool. Patients not only gain understanding about
their own situations but profit from the experiences of others.
It's always reassuring to know that there
are others going
through the same thing you are. These meetings also give me
an opportunity to decide which patients may need the assis-
tance of a psychotherapist.
PSYCHOTHERAPY
Although about 95 percent of our patients go through the
program without psychotherapy, some will need such help.
This means simply that they have higher levels of anxiety, anger
and other repressed feelings and that their brains are not going
to give up this convenient strategy of hiding these feelings
without a struggle. When someone tells me he is having trou-
ble accepting the diagnosis,
I suspect that there
is resistance
in the subconscious to giving up the TMS.
I recall a patient who reported that when he began to be-
come aware of these long-repressed feelings (through psycho-
therapy) they were so painful and frightening that he was
reluctant to deal with them.
These are not people suffering mental illness; these are peo-
ple who are leading normal, productive lives but who have
subconscious emotional baggage that they have never been
aware of. Sometimes things happen in childhood that leave
one with a large reservoir of resentment and anger but the
feelings are kept deeply buried because they are too scary or
socially unacceptable to be allowed to reach consciousness. As
has been said before, this tendency to repress bad feelings
is
universal; it is something we all do to a greater or lesser extent.
It is not neurotic—or we are all neurotic.
But in some, as in a person who was abused as a child, the

86
Healing Back Fain
repressed feelings may be strong and it is necessary for them
to have help in recognizing that those feelings are there and
in learning how to deal with them. That
is the role of psy-
chotherapy.
Unfortunately, society is
still backward about the need for
and the place of psychotherapy and there is a common feeling
that anyone who needs psychotherapy is weak or incompetent.
To harbor repressed feelings has nothing to do with strength
of character or mental competence. And yet we are so unen-
lightened about this matter in the United States that one
is
virtually ruled out of seeking public office if he or she has ever
been in psychotherapy.
It
is my own
bias that we would be
better governed
if
everyone running for an elective office were required to have
some psychotherapy.
I suspect we might be spared some of
the scandals in high places that occur with distressing regularity
in our nation.
Two things are emphasized about the need for psychother-
apy in our program: only about 5 percent of the patients will
require
it;
it is no disgrace to be one of the 5 percent.
I have great admiration for the people who go through our
program. They must overcome some not inconsiderable im-
pediments before they can get
better. One of these
is the
skepticism and sometimes ridicule they encounter. Another is
the constant admonition, usually from family members, to be
careful ("Don't lift that," "Don't bend over," "Be sure to put
on your corset")
. For this reason, I encourage the full partic-
ipation of close family members so that they will not under-
mine the therapeutic process.
One of the
biggest problems
for
patients
is developing
confidence that they can banish this physical disorder with a
learning program. That kind of thing is completely outside of
people's medical experience.
It
is my job to convince them
that
it can be done.

The Treatment ofTMS
87
FOLLOW-UP SURVEYS
An important confidence builder is the fact that most people
who have gone through the program have been successful. In
1982 we did a follow-up survey on 177 patients who had been
treated between 1978 and 1981. Seventy-six percent were lead-
ing normal lives with little or no pain, 8 percent were improved
and 16 percent were unchanged. Some of those patients had
not had the benefit of lectures and in many other ways the
program was not as sophisticated as
it is now.
In 1987 a similar follow-up study was done, this time on a
group of patients who all had CT scan-documented herniated
discs and had the TMS program between 1983 and 1986. This
time 88 percent (ninety-six people) were successful, 10 percent
were improved and only 2 percent were unchanged.
Still more recently the well-known journalist-writer Tony
Schwartz, who was successfully treated in 1986, mentioned in
an article he wrote for New York magazine on Dr. Bernie Siegel
that he had referred the program to forty patients for treatment
and thirty-nine of them were
free of pain.
I
call this Tony
Schwartz's miniseries.
A young colleague, Dr. Michael Sinel, at present assistant
director of Outpatient Physical Medicine at Cedars-Sinai Med-
ical Center, Los Angeles, has made the diagnosis and treated
about fifty patients. His work is noteworthy because included
in his patient population are some who were not necessarily
receptive to the idea of a tension-induced disorder, making
his job much more difficult. Nevertheless, following the basic
concepts enunciated in this book, his preliminary data indicate
that 75 percent of the group have had good to excellent pain
resolution and better than 90 percent have experienced sig-
nificant functional improvement.
I have invited my colleagues at medical meetings to observe

88
Healing Back Pain
the program and would welcome a survey conducted by an
outside organization. Statistics as impressive as mine are bound
to evoke skepticism in the medical community.
There is reason to believe the statistics will remain favorable,
since I now interview patients prior to consultation in order
to discourage those from coming who would not be receptive
to the diagnosis. The reality is that only a small proportion of
the back pain population would be open to the diagnosis and
it
is a waste of time and effort to try to treat someone who
could not accept the TMS diagnosis.
Some critics have said that I get such good results because
I only accept patients who believe in my concepts. But I can
only work with patients who are reasonably receptive to the
idea that their emotions are responsible for their pain. Even
so, most ofmy patients are still skeptical when I first see them.
It
is my job to convince them of the logic of the diagnosis,
because only by acknowledging the role of emotions can we
get the brain to stop doing what
it
is doing. That
is not
believing— it is learning.
Would a surgeon operate on a patient who was not a good
surgical risk? Should I be less selective than a surgeon?
Another common criticism by my peers, since we are talking
about critics, is that I go too far in claiming that the majority
of pain syndromes of the neck, shoulders and back are due to
TMS. "He may be right in 30 percent to 40 percent of the
cases," they say.
If 30 percent to 40 percent of back pain patients have TMS,
why then do these critics never make the diagnosis themselves?
The sad fact is that they cannot because it means repudiating
long-held diagnostic biases and acknowledging the role of the
emotions in these pain syndromes—something for which they
have a "visceral incapacity," to borrow a phrase from Senator
Byrd of West Virginia.
These treatment results are the only solid proof of the ac-
curacy of the diagnosis and the
efficacy of the therapeutic
program. Indeed, many of the people who come know one or

The Treatment ofTMS
89
more successfully treated patients. But that's not new in med-
icine. The
best
referral source
is
still a successfully treated
patient.
It should be emphasized I don't consider someone to have
been successfully treated unless he or she is free of significant
pain (everybody is entitled to a little bit of pain from time to
time) and
is able to engage in unrestricted physical activity
without fear. As said before, the fear of physical activity may
be more disabling than the pain for someone with a chronic
pain problem. Virtually everyone I have seen has been a pris-
oner of fear (of hurting himself, of bringing on an attack) and
that works even better than the pain to keep the attention
focused on the body instead of the emotions. It is our job to
liberate them from this pervasive fear.
I find myself searching endlessly for ways of getting the
message across. Certain phrases may reach some people but
not others—so I use them all:
"We're going to try to stop the body from reacting
physically to your emotions."
"We want you to learn to send messages to the sub-
conscious mind."
"Information
is the penicillin that cures this disor-
der."
"The cure
is wisdom."
"The cure
is knowledge."
"Until now your subconscious mind has been
in
charge; I'm going to teach you how to have your
conscious mind take over."
"Get mad at your brain; talk to
it; give
it hell."
"TMS is a trick your mind is playing on you—don't
fall for it."

90
Healing Back Fain
'TMS
is a sideshow designed to distract you from
what is going on emotionally."
'The symptoms are an act to mask what's going on
in the psyche."
"Most of the structural changes in your spine are
natural occurrences."
'The brain doesn't want to face up to the repressed
anger, so it is running away from it."
"By laughing at or ignoring the pain you are teaching
the brain to send new messages to the muscles."
"We're going to help you take the Sword of Dam-
ocles into your hands instead of having it hang
over your head."
I am particularly grateful to a patient, Ms. Norma Puziss,
who presented me with the following verse at the completion
of her treatment program.
It
is now a regular part of the
lecture-discussion.
Think psychological, not physical,
An idea that is most quizzical.
No one would have guessed
Emotions deeply repressed
Could produce such tension
Not even to mention
TMS.
There
is nothing to fear!
Subconscious, do you hear?
Tou concentrate on pain,
A back sufferer's bane,
To divert one's attention
From underlying tension.
Tour secret is out;

The Treatment ofTMS
91
Tou have lost your clout.
So give it up, resign—
TMS is benign!
I am in control, not you.
I have learned that Tve got to—
Think psychological, not physical.
I am sure that this wonderful bit of verse has been helpful
to many ofmy patients, since it captures one of the basic ideas
so beautifully.
Since it is characteristic of people with TMS to feel victim-
ized and not in control, the treatment program must help
them regain their sense of power by pointing out that the
source of the pain is a harmless process. I encourage patients
to develop an attitude of disdain toward the pain to replace
their strong feelings of intimidation. This sends a message to
the subconscious that the strategy of keeping attention
fo-
cused on the body is about to fail—which means the cessation
of pain.
QUESTIONS PEOPLE ASK
One of the more difficult concepts to grasp is the fact that one
does not have to eliminate tension from one's life.
People ask, "How do I change my personality and how do I
stop generating anxiety and angerl"
If these were prerequisites for recovery my cure rate would
be zero.
It
is not changing one's emotions;
it
is recognizing
that they exist and that the brain
is trying to keep one from
being aware of their existence through the mechanism of the
pain syndrome. That
is the key point in understanding why
the knowledge
is the effective cure.

92
Healing Back Fain
"How do you know that what you're doing is not a placebo?"
An excellent question and one that has always concerned
me because a placebo reaction is to be assiduously avoided. A
placebo cure
is almost always temporary and we are looking
for permanent resolution of the pain. Therefore, we would
not be satisfied with a placebo cure. This
is
all too common.
People are administered a large variety of physical treatments,
feel better for a few days, and then need another treatment.
(And, of course, they never overcome their fear of physical
activity.) One of the reasons I know the TMS program does
not induce a placebo reaction is the fact that almost all patients
have permanent resolution of symptoms.
A second reason is that the placebo effect is based on blind
faith; patients know little or nothing about the disorder they
have and the rationale for treatment. They simply trust the
treating practitioner. The educational program employed in
the treatment of TMS
is the very opposite.
I teach patients
literally all I know about the disorder; they are encouraged to
ask questions and they are warned that they must find the
diagnosis logical and consistent. Their recovery depends on
information, on awareness. They are active participants in the
recovery process. This is anything but a placebo process.
Perhaps the most compelling argument that what we do is
not a placebo is the fact that on numerous occasions since the
publication of the book Mind Over Back Pain, the predecessor
of this one, people have reported complete and permanent
resolution of pain simply by reading the book. There
is no
personality influence here, no bedside manner; just plain, solid
information. And we have learned that that's what it takes to
banish TMS.
(CWhy have you stopped using physical therapy as part ofyour
treatment program?"
This was touched on before but
it bears repeating. As has
just been said, any physical treatment can be a placebo,
in-

The Treatment ofTMS
93
eluding physical therapy, and we strive to avoid this because
the result is temporary. But there is another, more subtle rea-
son. If I am trying to get people to stop paying attention to
their bodies and
start thinking psychologically about
their
pain, am I not contradicting my own therapeutic strategy if I
prescribe physical therapy? It took me a long time to realize
this and get up the courage to stop prescribing it, for after all
I was taught to depend on physical treatments like everyone
else.
I only remember with some effort now how difficult it
was to start "going pure," that is, to depend on the education
program exclusively. In
fact, to emphasize the point,
I
rec-
ommend to patients that they stop doing all exercises that are
designed to protect or help the back, for the same reason. They
must do nothing to focus attention on the painful area.
In this same vein, patients are taught that there is no correct
way to bend or
lift, one doesn't need to avoid soft chairs or
mattresses, corsets and collars are unnecessary, and in general
the great number of admonitions and prohibitions that have
become part of back pain folklore are simply without foun-
dation because TMS is a harmless condition and there is noth-
ing structurally wrong with the back. Running is not bad for
the spine; weak abdominal muscles do not cause back pain;
strong back muscles do not prevent back pain;
it is perfectiy
all right to arch the back, swim the crawl or breast stroke; man
was meant to walk upright (Homo sapiens and his ancestors
have been doing so for somewhere between 3 and 4 million
years); a short leg does not cause back pain. One could go on
and on.
ccHow can I tell the difference between TMS and pain from
overworking unused muscles?"
That's easy. When you've done some unaccustomed physical
activity and wake up the next morning with aches in your arms
or legs,
it's a good kind of ache and
it's usually gone by the

94
Heeding Back Fain
following day. The pain ofTMS is always nasty and it doesn't
go away very quickly, if at
all.
(CWhat kind of exercise can I do?"
When the pain has subsided one can do anything and every-
thing, the more strenuous the better. Obviously one should
follow a strenuous routine only after consulting with one's
doctor. But the point is that exercise should be done for general
health reasons, not for the back.
"Suppose the pain goes away in my low back and starts up in
the neck and shoulders. What do I do?"
My routine advice to patients
is to call me up so that we
can discuss the meaning of the switch. During the early phases
of the treatment program the brain may try to locate the TMS
somewhere else in the neck, shoulders, back or buttocks. It is
reluctant to give up this convenient strategy for diverting at-
tention away from the emotions. Patients must be warned that
this may occur, that they must not panic or get discouraged,
but merely apply the same principles to the new location.
I
remind them that the musculoskeletal system is not the only
one where the brain can set up a diversion. It can do the same
thing in the gastrointestinal tract, the head, with tension or
migraine headache, the skin, the genitourinary tract. The brain
can cause mischief in any organ or system in the body, so one
must be on guard. I advise my patients to consult their regular
physicians if a new symptom occurs but to let me know about
it since
it may be serving the same purpose
as TMS. For
example, stomach ulcers should be treated with proper med-
ication but it is almost more important to recognize that they
are coming from tension factors.
ccWhat do I do ifIget a recurrence six months or a yearfrom
now?"

The Treatment ofTMS
95
I advise
patients to
call me immediately so that we can
promptly start looking for the psychological reason for it. This
usually means attendance at one of the small group meetings
or a visit to my office.
ccWhat about hypnosis? Isn't that agood way togetyour mind
to do what you want it to do?"
On a temporary basis, yes, but we are looking for a per-
manent cure. Just recently a study done at Stanford Medical
School and reported in TheAmericanJournal ofPsychiatry dem-
onstrated very nicely that with hypnosis pain could be mark-
edly diminished in some patients. That is desirable if you are
treating pain, as in patients with cancer. But I tell my patients,
with considerable agitation, that I don't treatpain! That would
be symptomatic treatment and it's poor medicine.
I treat the
disorder that is the root cause of the pain. To the best of my
knowledge, hypnosis would not contribute to that process.
Which leads to a subject I would rather not discuss, it pains
me so. But discuss it we must for it is ofgreat importance. It has
to do with how "chronic pain" is treated in the hundreds ofpain
clinics established in the last twenty years across the country.
The basic principle,
first enunciated by a nonphysician,
is
that chronic pain
is a separate disease entity, an exaggeration
of the pain of some persistent structural abnormality that de-
velops because patients derive what psychologists
call "sec-
ondary gain" from the pain. That
is, the pain brings them
some psychological benefit,
like attention, money or escape
from the world. It is theorized that patients learn this behavior
because
it
is encouraged by the medical system, family and
friends. Treatment is designed to discourage this by rewarding
nonpain behavior and "punishing"
its opposite. Students of
psychology will recognize these ideas
as deriving from the
work of B. F. Skinner, who became widely known for his work
in demonstrating this kind of conditioning.
While it is well known that human beings can be conditioned

96
Healing Back Pain
in the classic Pavlovian sense, one must be very careful about ap-
plying Skinnerian principles to human beings. Elements of sec-
ondary gain are often identified in my patients but they are by
no means the primary psychological factors at work. To attrib-
ute to secondary gain such importance
is to ignore the real
problem—repressed
feelings
of
all
kinds—and make
the
equally egregious mistake of failing to recognize the true phys-
iology ofthe pain, that it is not due to a persistent structural ab-
normality but to a psychophysiologic process, as described in
this book.
It
is for this reason that these pain clinics sometimes help
but rarely cure their patients.
"Is the TMS treatmentprogram an example ofvis medicatrix
naturae, or the bodfs ability to heal itself*"
In one sense
it certainly
is. But in another,
it goes beyond
the usual process of self-healing which is always at work when
we are injured or invaded by poisons or infectious agents. This
is an example of how a particular kind of physical disorder, a
psychophysiological process, can be reversed. In the last chap-
ter we shall discuss this and other mind-body interactions, a
subject that is finally beginning to command the attention of
research medicine.

5
The Traditional
(Conventional)
Diagnoses
Though
I find the chore distasteful,
it
is essential to review
the large number of disorders to which neck, shoulder, back
and limb pain are routinely attributed. The reader should know
what these diagnoses mean to the people who make them, to
the many disciplines that treat them, and to the people who
are diagnosed as having them.
In the course ofmy lectures to patients with TMS it is made
clear that it is important to know what's causing the pain and
what
is not causing
it, because many of the diagnoses to be
described evoke great fear and, as the preceding chapters make
clear, fear is a dominant factor in worsening and perpetuating
the pain syndrome.
The average citizen in this country believes that the low back
is a vulnerable, fragile structure, easily injured and constantly
prone to reinjury. As that perception widens, the occurrence
of back pain in the population increases so that now one re-
peatedly hears the astonishing figure that 80 percent to 85
percent of adults have a history ofone of these pain syndromes.
Ideas about the vulnerability of the back are, to a large extent,
based on the diagnoses
practitioners make. Such words
as
97

98
Healing Back Pain
herniation, degeneration,
deterioration and disintegration, con-
stantly used to describe the lower end of the spine, provoke
fear and provide a ready explanation for the "injury" and the
attack of excruciating pain. Further, there are dozens of pro-
hibitions and admonitions people learn in their interaction
with physicians and other practitioners, and sometimes from
family and friends, like these:
Don't bend.
Don't slouch.
Don't sit on soft chairs or couches.
Don't arch your back.
Don't swim the crawl or breast stroke.
Don't wear high heels.
Always lift with a straight back.
Running is bad for your spine.
Never run on hard surfaces.
Weak back muscles cause back pain.
Strong abdominal muscles protect you from back pain.
Always stretch before exercising.
If you have back pain avoid all vigorous sports.
This is only a partial list. Because of a basic misconception
of the cause of neck, shoulder and back pain there
is a mon-
umental body of misinformation to which people are exposed
and which contributes substantially to the severity and lon-
gevity of their painful episodes.
The truth is that the back is a rugged structure, fully capable
oftaking us through our daily lives, and then some. We exercise
our backs constantly, for the act of being up and about requires

The Traditional (Conventional) Diagnoses
99
that the postural muscles, which paradoxically are the only ones
involved in TMS, are always active in keeping the trunk upright
on the legs, and the head on the trunk. And if we take a brisk
walk, or jog, or run, those muscles are exercised even more.
They are undoubtedly the strongest muscles in the body.
When I hear that a professional athlete, a tennis player for
example, has had to pull out of a tournament because of back
pain, I marvel at the naivete that suggests that he or she has
a deficient back. Such a thing was practically unheard of thirty
years ago in tennis, golf, baseball, football or basketball. It is
.commonplace today.
Years ago
I saw a famous woman athlete who was having
pain in the very muscles she used most in her sport. Fortu-
nately, she immediately grasped the concept of TMS and her
pain promptly disappeared.
COMMON STRUCTURAL DIAGNOSES
In my experience structural abnormalities of the spine rarely
cause back pain. That ought not surprise us for this epidemic
of back pain is very new. Somehow the human race managed
to get through the
first million years or so of its evolution
without a problem, but if the structural diagnoses are correct,
something happened to the spine during the last evolutionary
eyeblink and
it has begun to fall apart.
This idea
is untenable. One suspects that these spine ab-
normalities have always been there but were never blamed for
pain because there was no pain to blame them for. Fifty years
ago back pain was not very common but, more importandy,
nobody took it seriously. The epidemic of back pain is due to
the enormous increase
in the incidence of TMS during the
past thirty years, and,
ironically, the
failure of medicine to
recognize and diagnose
it has been
a major
factor
in that
increase. Instead ofTMS the pain has been attributed primarily
to a variety of structural defects of the spine.

100
Heeding Back Tain
It's essential to know that almost
all of the structural ab-
normalities of the spine are harmless. With that in mind, let's
take a look at the common conventional diagnoses.
Herniated Disc
Though the back sufferer isn't aware of it, it is generally known
by students of the spine that the last intervertebral disc, be-
tween the
fifth lumbar vertebra and the sacrum,
is more or
less degenerated in most people by the age of twenty. Discs
are structures located between the bodies of spinal bones to
take up the shock. They are firmly attached to the vertebral
bodies above and below and in no way can they "slip." En-
closed by a tough, fibrous outer shell, there
is a thick fluid
inside, which is what absorbs the shock. The discs at the lower
end of the spine and in the neck, because of all the activity in
those locations, begin to wear out at an early age, some by
the age of twenty, as stated.
Although no one knows exacdy what happens, the disc gets
flatter, suggesting that the fluid inside has dried up or broken
through a weakened part of the disc wall, usually toward the
back. This breaking through the disc wall is what is known as
a disc rupture or, more commonly, herniation.
It
is probably
similar to squeezing toothpaste from a tube. In some cases,
the fluid does not break through but merely bulges the wall.
All of these things can be seen on a CT scan or MRI,
re-
markable diagnostic techniques that show soft tissue
detail.
Conventional X rays only show bone unless a contrast material
is used.
The important question
is, "What harm
is done by
this
extruded disc material, if any?"
The conventional idea
is that the "toothpaste" compresses
a nearby spinal nerve, thereby producing pain. If it is the disc
between lumbar vertebrae 4 (L4) and L5, or L5 and the sac-

The Traditional (Conventional) Diagnoses
101
rum, the pain will be in the leg. If in the neck, there
is arm
pain. The leg pain is usually called sciatica.
It has been my experience that herniated disc material
is
rarely responsible for pain or any other neurological symptom.
This is a minority opinion but I am not totally alone. A well-
known neurosurgeon and chairman of his department at the
University of Miami School of Medicine, Dr. Hubert Rosom-
ofF, has come to a similar conclusion, discussed in his article
"Do Herniated Discs Produce Pain?," published in Advances
in Pain Research and Therapy and edited by H.
Fields, R.
Dubner, F. Cervero and L. Jones (New York: Raven Press,
1985). He did back surgery for many years and apparendy
bases his conclusion on observed inconsistencies and the log-
ical
fact
of
neurological
pathophysiology
that
continued
compression of a nerve will cause it to stop transmitting pain
messages after a short time. The result is numbness. How could
the herniation then cause continuing pain?
Another highly respected physician and investigator who
studied the problem for years, Dr. Alf Nachemson of Sweden,
concluded in his article "The Lumbar Spine: An Orthopedic
Challenge," published in 1976 in Spine (Vol.
1, p. 59), that
the cause of back pain was unknown in the majority of cases
and almost all should be treated nonsurgically.
My conclusion that most disc herniations are harmless
is
based on seventeen years of treating such patients with a high
degree of success, leading to the impression that the extruded
material
is not hurting anything;
it's just there.
The innocence of the poor, maligned disc was first suspected
when a frequent lack of correlation was noted between what
one would expect the disc herniation to do and what was found
on taking a history and doing a physical examination.
For example, the diagnostic study (CT scan or MRI) might
show a herniated disc
at the interspace L4-L5, one of the
possible consequences ofwhich might be weakness in the mus-
cles which elevate the foot and the
toes. The examination,
however, revealed that not only those muscles were weak but

102
Healing Back Fain
so were the ones
in back of the
leg, muscles
that
are not
energized by the spinal nerve passing by interspace L4-L5.
Then when I found on examination that the buttock muscles
in the vicinity of the sciatic nerve were painful to pressure,
it
was apparent that the nerve disturbance was not coming from
the region of the herniated disc but from the
sciatic nerve
which serves both sets of muscles. The following case history
illustrates this:
The patient was a forty-four-year-old professional woman
with a fifteen-year history of recurrent low back and leg pain.
About seven months prior to consultation she had a severe
attack with pain in the low back and right leg. She also com-
plained of weakness in the right leg.
A CT scan demonstrated a small herniation of disc material
between the fifth lumbar vertebra and the sacrum that must
have been extruded a long time ago for
it was
calcified.
It
didn't look capable of causing symptoms but that was the
diagnosis.
Pain
continued
during
the
intervening
seven
months and she was restricted physically because of the weak-
ness in the right leg.
My examination disclosed an absent right ankle tendon re-
flex and weakness of the
right calf muscles. Both of these
findings could be explained by pressure on the first sacral spinal
nerve (which
is what the original doctor claimed) since that
nerve sends motor fibers to the calf muscle and does pass in
the vicinity of the disc in question. However, further exami-
nation showed that the muscles on the front of the leg were
also weak; she had partial foot drop. This could not be ascribed
to the disc herniation because the spinal nerves supplying these
muscles were not near the herniation.
On the other hand,
all of the findings could be explained
by something interfering with normal function of the right
sciatic nerve, as commonly seen with TMS. That nerve receives
branches from spinal nerves lumbar 3, lumbar 4, lumbar 5,
sacral
1 and
sacral
2. Therefore, anything that disturbs the

The Traditional (Conventional) Diagnoses
103
sciatic nerve may affect the parts of the leg supplied by any or
all of those nerves, which was clearly the case with this patient.
Her examination also revealed tenderness on pressure over
all the muscles of the right buttock, which is where the sciatic
nerve is located. This and other characteristic findings on phys-
ical testing established the diagnosis of TMS involving the
right buttock and sciatic nerve; the herniated disc was an in-
cidental finding of no significance.
Such clinical discrepancies are common and make one won-
der why they are not routinely discovered.
So fixed are physicians on the herniated disc, the diagnosis
is sometimes made solely on the basis of a history of simul-
taneous low back, buttock and leg pain, or even in the absence
of leg pain, without benefit of a CT scan or MRI study. The
diagnosis of herniated disc cannot be made clinically or even
with plain X rays. If the latter are done, what
is usually seen
is narrowing of an intervertebral disc space, most frequently
of the
last two
intervertebral spaces. At the
last space
this
abnormality is almost universal beyond the age of twenty, as
stated earlier.
It means the disc has degenerated, and
it
is a
perfectly normal part of the aging process. It may be tempting
but is inadvisable to attribute symptoms to normal aging phe-
nomena. In my experience, disc degeneration is no more path-
ological than graying hair or wrinkling skin.
In recent years there have been numerous reports
in the
medical literature of herniated discs in patients with no history
of back pain. They were discovered inadvertently on CT or
MRI studies done to investigate other parts of the body.
In
fairness to an objective evaluation of the problem,
it
should be noted that in one statistical study there was a higher
incidence of back pain historically in people with evidence of
disc abnormalities.
I have tried to reconcile this with the clear
observation that it is TMS and not disc pathology that causes
the pain and can only conclude that in the mysterious process
by which the brain chooses a site for TMS
it selects an area

104
Healing Back Pain
of "abnormality"
(like disc herniation) even though the ana-
tomical aberration may not be pathological.
In order to document the large number of herniated disc
patients treated successfully over many years a follow-up survey
was conducted in 1987. One hundred and nine patients were
interviewed by telephone by a research assistant. Their names
were selected randomly from a large population of patients
who were seen and treated from one to three years previously.
In each case pain was attributed to a herniated disc that could
be seen on CT scan. Based on history and physical examination,
the diagnosis was TMS; all went through the usual treatment
program. The results were as follows:
Free, or nearly free of pain, unrestricted phys-
ical
activity
96
(88 percent)
Improved, some pain, restricted activity... 11
(10 percent)
Unchanged
2
(2 percent)
The two patients who did not improve were found to have
severe, persistent psychological problems and continue in psy-
chotherapy to this day.
These statistics make
it difficult to take the herniated disc
seriously. Yet each of these patients had been told that this
was the reason for the pain; thirty-nine had been advised to
have surgery; three had already had such surgery; and most
of the rest had been told that surgery might be necessary if
conservative measures failed.
Here is another case history. The patient was a twenty-five-
year-old man with a history of low back and right leg pain;
he had had a lumbar myelogram showing a herniated disc two
months before
I saw him in consultation. He was advised to
stop all physical activity and surgery was recommended, both
appropriate recommendations if the disc was the cause of the
pain. A dedicated athlete (basketball and squash were his fa-
vorites), he was devastated by the diagnosis. He was further

The Traditional (Conventional) Diagnoses
105
upset by the fact that he would no longer be able to "burn
off" his tension through vigorous sports, and he saw himself
as a very tense fellow.
He decided against surgery and, with great trepidation, con-
tinued to work out in the gymnasium; he even played bas-
ketball occasionally. Though he got neither better nor worse,
he lived in constant fear that he might really hurt himself.
My examination disclosed no evidence of nerve damage in
either leg; the straight leg-raising test on both sides caused
pain in the right buttock. As usual with TMS there was pain
on manual pressure over the muscles of both buttocks, the
small of the back on both sides, the top of both shoulders and
the sides of the neck. These findings indicated that the pain
was due to TMS and not the herniated disc. He accepted the
diagnosis, participated in the treatment program and was free
of pain in a few weeks. It is now about twelve years since that
patient was seen and he has continued to do well despite his
vigorous physical program.
Spinal Stenosis
During the years that I have been engaged in this work I have
seen the diagnosis of spinal stenosis emerge as one of the most
common when there
is low back pain and no herniated disc
to blame. It refers to narrowing ofthe spinal canal, occasionally
thought to be congenital but most often as a result of aging
in the spinal bones. Buildup of bone, in some places called
osteophytes, narrows the canal.
My reaction to this abnormality is based on experience with
patients. Most of those
I have seen, regardless of age, were
found to have TMS, which allowed me to disregard the X-ray
diagnosis. When stenosis is severe the canal should be widened
surgically, but I have seen very few of such cases.
It is my practice, particularly with older patients, to suggest
neurological consultation so that the possibility of significant

106
Healing Back Pain
impingement on neural structures can be carefully studied. If
the neural picture is satisfactory and the patient has the classic
findings ofTMS I proceed with confidence regardless of what
the X ray shows.
Pinched 'Nerve
After herniated disc, apinched nerve is one ofthe most common
diagnoses made, usually when patients present with pain in
the neck, shoulder and upper limb on the same side. What is
presumably being pinched is a cervical spinal nerve as it courses
its way through a hole formed by contiguous cervical vertebrae
(known as a foramen) and what is supposed to be doing the
pinching
is an osteophyte (see above—a buildup of bone, a
bone spur) or a herniated disc.
The diagnosis
is fraught with difficulty;
it rests on exceed-
ingly shaky concepts. Once more, the need to identify a struc-
tural cause is the problem and sometimes breeds a disturbing
lack of objectivity. The following observations throw doubt
on the pinched nerve diagnosis.
First, these symptoms often occur in young adults, who have
no bone spurs and no herniated discs.
Second, bone spurs are extremely common and many people
who have them don't have pain. Spurs increase in number and
size with advancing age, so that by late middle age and beyond
everyone ought to have neck and arm pain from them, but
everyone doesn't.
Third, neuroradiologists (specialists in X rays of the nervous
system) tell us the spurs would have to obliterate the foramen
before compression of the nerve would occur, something one
rarely sees.
Fourth, the same principle applies here as with the lumbar
herniated disc: Persistent compression of a nerve will produce
objective numbness (absence of pain on testing). This
is dif-

The Traditional (Conventional) Diagnoses
107
ferent from the subjective sensation of numbness that patients
sometimes feel in a leg or arm.
Fifth, there are numerous reports in the medical literature
of large growths in the spine, like benign tumors, that often
produce no pain.
Most "pinched nerve" patients have TMS involving the mus-
cles of the neck and shoulders, particularly the upper trapezius
muscle and the cervical spinal nerves after they have
left the
spinal bones. Four cervical and the first thoracic spinal nerves
form what is known as the brachial plexus, a kind of staging
area, where they are then reorganized into the nerves that go
into the arm and hand.
It
is highly likely that the brachial
plexus is often implicated in the TMS process. But whether it
is the spinal nerves, the brachial plexus or both
is irrelevant,
for we do not treat the disorder locally; we work on it where
it begins—in the brain.
Here
is a striking case history that teaches many lessons.
The patient was a middle-aged professional woman who de-
veloped pain in the
left neck, shoulder and entire
left arm,
with particularly severe pain in the wrist. She was often awak-
ened at night by the wrist pain. To make matters worse she
realized one day that she had lost almost all movement at the
left shoulder, what's known as a "frozen shoulder." This
is a
common complication of shoulder pain. Patients apparentiy
begin to limit movement at the shoulder, probably because of
pain, without realizing that they're not moving
it, and are
suddenly aware that the range ofmotion is gone. In the absence
of normal movement the capsule of the shoulder joint shrinks,
as
it will in any joint in which there
is restricted movement.
Further, she reported that the
left hand was weak and she
tended to drop things.
Despite the ominous sound of these symptoms I suspected
she had TMS and the physical examination supported the
diagnosis. The patient was receptive to the diagnosis. She was
familiar with the syndrome and
fit the psychological profile

108
Healing Back Pain
perfectly:
she was overcommitted
professionally,
extremely
hardworking and compulsive about her responsibilities.
To my embarrassment the symptoms did not respond to the
usual therapeutic program; on the contrary they continued to
be severe for many weeks. Thinking there might be something
serious going on that was mimicking TMS,
I arranged for a
neurologic consultation. The physical examination and all tests
were normal.
After many weeks the symptoms began to subside and as
they did we both realized why they had started in the
first
place and why she was now getting better. The trouble began
when she was informed that she was going to lose a very
important member of her research team. In anticipation of
that event an enormous amount of work had to be done and
she dreaded her departure—hence a great deal of anxiety and
undoubtedly a lot ofdeep-down anger at this unfortunate turn
of events was generated. The subconscious mind
is not par-
ticularly logical about such things.
Total disappearance of symptoms coincided with the actual
departure of the valued colleague, suggesting that with the fait
accompli there was no longer any need for the TMS. She
regained full range of motion of the shoulder without benefit
of physical therapy.
This was a classic "pinched nerve" diagnosis—except that
it wasn't. As the case clearly demonstrates, TMS exists in the
service of psychological phenomena. To attribute symptoms
to a structural abnormality is a sad diagnostic error.
The Facet Syndrome
Facet
is the technical name
for a joint between two spinal
bones. Like
all joints they are subject to wear and tear and
begin to look abnormal as we get along in years. It is believed
that these changes cause pain in some patients. In my expe-
rience they do not.

The Traditional (Conventional) Diagnoses
109
Arthritis of the Spine
What is generally meant when the term arthritis of the spine is
used is osteoarthritis or osteoarthrosis. These refer to the normal
aging changes we have been talking about. They are also re-
ferred to as spondylosis. I have not found that this is patholog-
ical,
therefore,
not
productive of symptoms.
Rheumatoid
arthritis
is an entirely different matter.
It is an inflammatory
process which can strike at any joint in the body and is always
painful.
Transitional Vertebra
Transitional vertebra is a congenital abnormality in which there
is an extra bone at the lower end of the spine, usually attached
to the pelvic bone. It often gets the blame when found in the
presence of back pain.
Spondylolysis
Spondylolysis
is another defect in a vertebral bone, easily de-
tected on X ray and rarely responsible for back pain in my
experience.
Spina Bifida Occulta
Spina bifida occulta
is
still another congenital abnormality at
the end of the spine, but in this one there
is a piece of bone
missing. Once more, pain
is historically (but mistakenly)
at-
tributed to this defect.

110
Healing Back Pain
Spondylolisthesis
Spondylolisthesis is an abnormality in which two vertebral bones,
usually at the lower end of the spine, are not correctly aligned
with each other. One
is in front of the other.
It
is a scary-
looking thing on X ray but
I have found
it to be uniformly
benign.
It
is of course possible that there are some that are
not benign but thus far I have not seen one such.
There have been some pretty dramatic cases over the years.
I
recall a man in his
late
fifties with a three-year history of
increasing back pain that was the bane of his existence, to use
an old
cliche. He
couldn't
participate
in
sports, which he
missed badly, and he described his days
as "pure torture."
Though surgery was recommended more than once, he was
afraid of it despite his desperate condition.
The examination revealed an extremely anxious man, though
quite healthy looking. There were no neurological changes in
his legs but
all of the muscles from his neck to his buttocks
were exquisitely tender to pressure. He was a classic case of
TMS.
Here was a dilemma: One patient with two diagnoses, spon-
dylolisthesis and TMS.
I had no doubt that the pain was due
to the TMS and the patient said he wanted to believe me, but
what about the doctors who recommended surgery—could
they be wrong?
I suggested that since he obviously had TMS
we should try to rid him of that pain and see what was left.
The usual course of treatment was begun and the pain began
to diminish. About four weeks into the program he went on
a vacation with his wife and reported on his return that he
had been totally free of pain during the entire holiday. Upon
his return to New York and the resumption of his usual
life
the pain returned, but to a milder degree. There was no longer
any question about the cause of his pain. He continued to

The Traditional (Conventional) Diagnoses
111
improve and three months after his first visit resumed his fa-
vorite sport.
The man wrote me on his first anniversary of having con-
sulted with me and all was still well. He was playing his game
competitively and considered his recovery remarkable in view
of the fact that his treatment consisted only of listening and
learning.
It would be imprecise to say that spondylolisthesis never
causes back pain; but, thus
far,
I have not seen a patient in
whom
it did.
Between 1976 and 1980 two Israeli physicians, Dr. A. Ma-
gora and Dr. A. Schwartz, published four medical articles in
the Scandinavian Journal of Rehabilitation Medicine in which
they reported the results of studies they had done to determine
whether certain spinal abnormalities caused back pain. Their
method was to compare the X rays of people with and without
a history of back pain.
If people with back pain had these
abnormalities more commonly, one could presume that the
abnormalities might be the cause of the pain.
They found no statistical difference in the incidence of de-
generative osteoarthritis, transitional vertebra, spina bifida oc-
culta and spondylolysis between the two groups. There was a
small
statistical
difference
for
spondylolisthesis.
In
other
words, one could not attribute back pain to these disorders,
with the possible exception of spondylolisthesis.
A similar study was conducted by an American radiologist
Dr. C. A. Splithoffand published in xhtJournal of'theAmerican
Medical Association
in 1953. He compared the incidence of
nine different abnormalities of the end of the spine in people
with and without back pain. Again he found no
statistical
difference.
These studies suggest that structural abnormalities of the
spine do not generally cause back pain.

112
Healing Back Pain
Scoliosis
Scoliosis refers to an abnormal curvature of the spine commonly
seen in teenage girls and usually persisting into adult life. Its
cause is unknown. It rarely causes pain in teenagers but is often
blamed for back pain in adults.
I have not yet found this to
be the case. The following case history is typical.
The patient was a woman in her thirties who had suffered
recurrent attacks of back pain since her teens. Several years
before I saw her she had experienced a severe attack at a time
when she was taking care ofher young children. Mild scoliosis,
to which the pain was attributed, was seen on X rays. She was
told her back pain would gradually worsen as she got older.
Despite this dire prediction she recovered from that episode
and did fairly well until two months before I saw her, when
she had a bad attack. She said it began when she was bending
over and "felt something snap," a common description of on-
set, as described earlier in the book. She was further frightened
because her trunk was tilted to one side.
On taking her history I learned that over the years she had
experienced a number of episodes of tendonitis in the arms
and legs, occasional pain in the neck and shoulders, stomach
and colon symptoms, hay fever and severe headaches. A classic
TMS patient.
The physical examination was normal except for the usual
tenderness on palpation ofmuscles in the neck, shoulders, back
and buttocks.
She had no trouble accepting the diagnosis, participated in
the treatment program, and was soon pain free. She later re-
ported that there had been no more attacks, that she sometimes
had mild pain but knew
it was harmless and went about her
life without fear.
It is clear that scoliosis was not the source of her pain since

The Traditional (Conventional) Diagnoses
113
nothing in the treatment changed the scoliosis.
It
is equally
clear that her personality predisposed her to a variety of benign
physical ailments, including TMS.
Osteoarthritis of the Hip
Osteoarthritis of the hip
is well known among laymen because
it is common and because of the dramatic surgical procedure
in which the entire hip joint is replaced; the patient gets a new
socket and a new ball (the head of the femur) to
fit into
it.
This
is certainly one of the great triumphs of reconstructive
surgery.
What necessitates this operation is the overgrowth of bone
and the wearing away of the cartilage of the joint so that
it
loses range of movement and becomes dysfunctional. It is also
alleged that these osteoarthritic joints are painful, and that may
be so in some cases. One must, however, be very careful, for
I have seen a number of patients whose "hip" pain was clearly
due to a manifestation of TMS.
Just recently I saw such a case. The patient was a woman
in her sixties who complained of hip pain. X ray of the hip
joint showed only moderate osteoarthritic change (to which
the pain had been, nevertheless, attributed) but the physical
examination told the tale. She had perfectly normal range of
motion in the joint and there was no pain with weight bearing
on that leg. The site of the pain was located about two inches
above the joint and could be reproduced by direct pressure.
What she had was tendonalgia due to TMS.
Frequendy the pain will come from buttock muscle or the
sciatic nerve involved with TMS.
I can say this with some
confidence because
I treat these people and their pain goes
away.
I do not say that this
is invariable but merely that one
must be alert to the possibility that hip pain is not always due
to a degenerated hip joint.

114
Heating Back Fain
Chondromalacia
Chondromalacia is a roughening of the underside of the patella
(kneecap), demonstrable on X
ray, which
is no doubt the
reason why it is routinely blamed for knee pain. Unlike what
has just been said about hip osteoarthritis, this
is a disorder
that never, in my experience, causes pain. Invariably the ex-
amination discloses evidence of TMS tendonalgia of one or
more of the many tendons and ligaments that surround the
knee. The pain in these cases is not knee pain, strictiy speaking,
for it is from outside the joint.
Bone Spurs
Bone spurs are often demonstrated by X ray and universally
blamed for pain in the heel. In my experience the spur is not
symptomatic and the pain is usually due to TMS tendonalgia.
Soft Tissue Disorders: fibromyalgia
(FibrositiSy Myofibrositis,
Myofascitis)
Muscular rheumatism, chronic aches and pains, disturbed sleep
and morning stiffness affect a few million people in the United
States, most of them women between the ages of twenty and
fifty, and may be diagnosed as fibromyalgia. It is said that only
a small percentage of fibromyalgia patients are properly di-
agnosed and that failing to find any laboratory abnormality
some doctors often conclude
that the disorder
is "psycho-
genic."
Though the diagnosis of fibromyalgia
is being made with

The Traditional (Conventional) Diagnoses
115
increasing frequency, the cause of the disorder is
still said to
be unknown. The patient
is advised not to worry about
it
because it's not "psychogenic" (putting it in quotes obviously
means it's a bad word) and it is not degenerative or deforming.
For many years it has been clear to me that this disorder is
one of the many variants of TMS. Therefore, though it is not
degenerative or deforming it certainly is psychogenic, for that
is the overall term that covers a physical process that is induced
by emotional factors. But, as has been said so many times in
this book, many doctors have a visceral inability to accept such
a concept. Psychogenic
is
a dirty word;
it's what you
call
something if you can't figure out what it is. They cannot con-
ceive of the possibility that emotions can cause bodily changes.
Doctors generally say they are not sure what causes fibro-
myalgia (TMS) but a laboratory abnormality has been iden-
tified in this disorder:
it is oxygen deprivation, as noted in the
physiology chapter (see page 61).
The trouble is that having identified a physiologic alteration
the doctors don't know what to do with the information,
though they try mightily to explain it on physical and chemical
grounds. With admirable erudition they bring forth everything
that is known about the physics and chemistry of muscle and
with these facts construct an elaborate etiologic hypothesis,
but the patient continues to be in pain.
Fibromyalgia is TMS.
I have seen and treated hundreds of
people with these symptoms over the years. As stated elsewhere
they suffer more severely than the average patient with TMS
and often require psychotherapy.
Bursitis
A bursa is a structure designed to protect underlying bone in
a place where there is a lot of pressure. There are two locations
where pain is often attributed to an inflammation in the bursa:

116
Healing Back Pain
the shoulder and the hip. Medically, these are known as sub-
acromial bursitis and trochanteric bursitis.
The shoulder
is
a complicated joint and there
are many
things that may go wrong and cause pain. What I find most
frequentiy
is that the painful structure
is
a tendon passing
above the bursa at or near the point of the tendon's attachment
to bone
(the acromion). Hence, the cause of the pain
is a
tendonalgia, not bursitis, and like most tendonalgias,
is due
to TMS. Thus, both the anatomy and the pathophysiology are
wrong in many cases of TMS when the pain
is attributed to
subacromial bursitis.
Similarly, pain around what one might call the point of the
hip (the trochanter)
is usually ascribed to bursitis but in my
experience is again a tendonalgia of TMS origin.
Tendon manifestations ofTMS have been discussed in detail
in other sections of the book and will be touched on briefly
here.
Tendonitis
In the group of disorders referred to as tendonitis, the tendon
is correcdy identified as the offending part but the reason given
for the pain is incorrect. The anatomy is right but the diagnosis
is wrong.
It
is generally assumed that the painful tendon
is
inflamed because of overuse. So the treatment is to immobilize
and rest the part and/or inject the tendon with a steroid (cor-
tisone). Relief is often only temporary.
Many years ago the suspicion dawned on me that tendonitis
(more properly called tendonalgia) might be
part of TMS
when a patient reported that not only had his back pain re-
solved with treatment but his elbow had ceased to hurt.
I put
this to the test and, indeed, found that I could get resolution
of most tendonalgias.
I now consider tendon/ligament to be
the third type of tissue involved in TMS.

The Traditional (Conventional) Diagnoses
117
Common sites of tendonalgia are the shoulder, elbow, wrist,
hip, knee, ankle and foot.
Coccydynia
Coceydynia refers to pain deep in the midline crease between
the buttocks.
It
is generally assumed that the tail end of the
bone, the coccyx, is the source of pain though it is quite clear
that often the area involved
is the lower end of the sacrum.
Whether
it
is coccyx or sacrum,
the symptom
is usually
a
mystery to the diagnostician since nothing
is seen on X ray.
Commonly, patients will relate it to a hard fall, usually in the
distant past.
Coccydynia is a frequent manifestation ofTMS and is prob-
ably a tendonalgia since muscles
attach to the sacrum and
coccyx
all along their length. Proof?
It disappears with the
talking treatment.
Neuroma
Another TMS
tendonalgia
attributed
to something
else
is
found in the fore part of the bottom of the foot. Pain is usually
in the metatarsal region and
is almost always blamed on a
neuroma, which
is a benign tumor. The pain goes with TMS
treatment.
Plantar Fasciitis
The pain in plantar fasciitis
is located on the bottom of the
foot along the length of the arch. Although they are often
vague about cause, doctors may ascribe this pain to inflam-
mation. The area is usually very tender to palpation and seems
quite clearly to be a manifestation of TMS.

118
Healing Back Pain
Mononeuritis Multiplex
Mononeuritis multiplex is another descriptive diagnosis for the
cause is frequendy unknown. It refers to nerve symptoms that
appear to affect many nerves in a random pattern. It can occur
with diabetes, but many people who have
it are not diabetic.
In my view
it is often an example of TMS neuralgia because
TMS tends to involve so many different muscles and nerves
in the neck, shoulders and back.
TemporomandibularJoint Syndrome (TMJ)
Temporomandibular joint syndrome
is a very common painful
condition of the face that has historically been attributed to
pathology of the jaw joint (TM joint) and, therefore, has been
in the dental domain.
I have never treated this disorder spe-
cifically but am strongly inclined to think that
it is similar in
cause to tension headache and TMS. TMS patients who come
in for neck and shoulder pain frequently give a history ofTMJ,
and the jaw muscle is tender to palpation, just like the shoulder,
back and buttock muscles.
Inflammation
Inflammation must be discussed for it is the explanation pre-
sented for many cases of upper and lower back pain and is the
basis for the prescription of both
steroidal
(cortisone) and
nonsteroidal (such as ibuprofen) anti-inflammatory drugs. Be-
cause of the magnitude of the back pain problem, these med-
ications are widely used.

The Traditional (Conventional) Diagnoses
119
Experience with the diagnosis and treatment ofTMS makes
it clear that the source of the pain is neither spinal structures
nor inflammation. An inflammatory process
is an automatic
reaction to disease or injury; it is basically a protective, healing
process. The response to an invading bacteria or virus
is an
inflammation.
If that's what an inflammatory process is, what is going on
in the back? Is
it an infection, a response to a back injury
or what? No satisfactory, scientifically supported answer has
ever been given.
It has been suggested in this book that the
source of the pain is oxygen deprivation and not inflammation.
This idea has at least a modicum of support from the rheu-
matologic studies on fibromyalgia.
Sprain and Strain
The term sprain should be restricted to clear-cut instances of
minor injury, like turning the ankle. I am not sure what a strain
is supposed to be. Unfortunately, both of these terms are often
used when the symptom is a TMS manifestation.
Having
briefly reviewed these common
traditional diag-
noses for back pain, let us now look at the conventional treat-
ments employed.

6
The Traditional
(Conventional)
Treatments
In a textbook chapter on the treatment of back pain,
I once
wrote that therapeutic eclecticism
is a sign of diagnostic in-
competence. The fact that there are so many different treat-
ments
for
the common
neck,
shoulder
and
back
pain
syndromes suggests that the diagnosticians are not really sure
what the problem
is. Of course, the patient is always given a
diagnosis, usually a structural one, but subsequent manage-
ment, including the use of medications, physical therapies of
different kinds, manipulation, traction, acupuncture, biofeed-
back, transcutaneous nerve stimulation and surgery, many of
which are symptomatic treatments, suggests that the diagnoses
are on shaky grounds.
People with TMS need to know about these treatments so
they can understand why they did or did not respond to them
or why they derived only partial or temporary benefit from
them.
In thinking about how to review the subject it occurred to
me that the best approach might be to consider each treatment
modality from the standpoint of
its intended purpose. Of
course,
all treatments
are supposed to
relieve pain but the
important question
is how. What
is the
rationale
for each
120

The Traditional (Conventional) Treatments
121
treatment? Before we get into this let's review once more the
subject of the placebo effect because of its crucial importance
in any discussion of treatment.
THE PLACEBO EFFECT
A placebo
is any treatment that produces a good therapeutic
result despite the fact it has no intrinsic therapeutic value. A
sugar pill
is the classic example.
It
is clear that the desirable
outcome must be attributed to the ability of the mind to ma-
nipulate the various organs and systems of the body. In order
to do this the mind must believe in the efficacy ofthe treatment
and/or the treater. The key concept here is belief—the patient
must have blind faith. But if he or she does the result can be
impressive. Consider the following story, which was first re-
ported by Dr. Bruno Klopfer in 1957.
It concerns a man with a fulminating cancer of the lymph
nodes who convinced his doctor to treat him with a drug called
Krebiozen; the man had a miraculous recovery with disappear-
ance of his many large tumors. He did well until he heard news
reports of the ineffectiveness of Krebiozen, whereupon he re-
gressed to the same desperate state in which he had been before.
Impressed with his response to the treatment, the doctor
told him he would give him injections of a more powerful
Krebiozen, but this time used only sterile water. Once more
the
patient responded dramatically and
his tumors melted
away. When the American Medical Association officially an-
nounced the decision that Krebiozen was of no value,
his
tumors returned and he died soon after.
It is clear from this case history that a placebo works on the
body not the imagination. In this instance it stimulated a vig-
orous response in the immune system that was able to destroy
the tumors.
Based on the impression that most of the pain syndromes
I see are due to TMS, I have to conclude that beneficial results

122
Heeding Back Fain
from most of the treatments to be described are the work of
the placebo factor.
Treatments Designed to Rest
an Injured Part
If the pain in a given case is truly the result of an injury, ifsome
structure has been traumatized,
if a period of healing
is
re-
quired, then treatments designed to rest an injured part are log-
ical. They include rest in bed, the use oflumbar traction (which
is really designed to keep the patient in bed, since the weights
used could not possibly pull the spinal bones apart), restric-
tions on physical activity, and the use of cervical collars, lumbar
corsets or braces. The
rest in bed
is almost universally pre-
scribed for patients thought to be suffering from a herniated
disc.
If, however, there is no pathological structural abnormality,
if the person has TMS, the rationale
is gone. Not only are
these prescriptions of no value but they contribute to an in-
tensification of the problem by suggesting to the patient that
there
is something going on dangerous enough to require
complete immobilization. As emphasized
in the
treatment
chapter, even the perception of a physical rather than an emo-
tional cause for the pain will perpetuate the symptoms.
The collars and corsets used are a bit ridiculous for they do
not immobilize the part corseted. When someone reports feel-
ing better or having become dependent on one of these,
I
think placebo.
Treatments to Relieve Pain
Pain relief is the goal of all treatments but treatments to relieve
pain are designed to take away pain per se. Generally, this
is

The Traditional (Conventional) Treatments
123
symptomatic treatment and, therefore, poor medicine unless
it is administered for humanitarian purposes. The use of mor-
phine, Demerol or other strong analgesics is certainly justified
when there
is excruciating pain but not as a definitive treat-
ment.
Acupuncture appears to work as a local anesthetic. In other
words,
it blocks the transmission of pain nerve impulses to
the brain. If one
is dealing with a chronic disease for which
no relief of pain can be expected, this is a good treatment. For
the typical back patient it can give temporary relief but it does
nothing about the underlying process, the cause of the pain.
Nerve blocks are widely used across the country, especially
when pain
is severe and intractable. A local anesthetic
is in-
jected and does essentially what acupuncture does. Therefore,
the criticism of this as treatment for back pain is the same.
Transcutaneous nerve stimulation (TNS)
depends on mild
electric shocks administered over the painful area to give pain
relief. Electrodes are usually taped in place and the patient can
activate the shock at will. One can say the same thing about
this as for the two above. However, there
is a real question
whether this functions as anything but a placebo. A group at
the Mayo Clinic published
a study in 1978
in which they
demonstrated that a placebo worked equally well (G. Thor-
steinsson, H. H. Stonnington, G. K. Stillwell and L. R. Elve-
back,
"The
Placebo
Effect
of Transcutaneous
Electrical
Stimulation," Pain, Vol. 5, p. 31).
When there
is prolonged relief as a result of any of these
treatments one must suspect a placebo effect; there can be no
other explanation,
for they do not attack the cause of the
problem.
Treatments to Promote Relaxation
To the prescribers of treatments to promote relaxation I would
put the question, "To what end?" "What
is your purpose in

124
Healing Back Pain
trying to relax the person?" "What do you hope to accom-
plish?"
There is considerable fuzziness about this subject in the area
of pain relief. There is no question that a calm, relaxed person
will experience less pain, but again we are engaged in symp-
tomatic treatment. The basic disorder
is not being treated.
And how much time can be devoted each day to the relaxing
exercises? I advise my patients that meditation and relaxation
exercises can't hurt but one cannot depend on them for defin-
itive relief of pain.
The specific role of biofeedback in pain relief is to produce
muscle relaxation. The usual procedure
is to affix small elec-
trodes over forehead muscles whose electrical activity (which
reflects muscular activity) then registers on a gauge or screen.
The subject
is then instructed to reduce the gauge reading,
which means the muscle has relaxed and this in turn produces
reflex relaxation in muscles elsewhere in the body.
I do not prescribe biofeedback,
as, again,
it is treating the
symptom.
Treatments to Correct
a Structural Abnormality
Probably the most common treatment among those used to
correct a structural abnormality
is manipulation. The abnor-
mality for which this is used is malalignment of spinal bones
and the purpose of treatment is to restore alignment. I do not
believe the abnormality exists, and if it did,
I do not believe
it could be changed by manipulation. On occasion dramatic
relief of pain follows a manipulation, suggesting that the per-
son
is having a good placebo response. Patients generally re-
turn for these treatments regularly. It is likely, therefore, that
they are having a placebo response, which
is known to be
temporary.

The Traditional (Conventional) Treatments
125
Though not as common as manipulation, surgery to remove
extruded intervertebral disc material
is frequently performed.
Without question such procedures are often essential. It is my
impression, however, based upon my experience with patients
with herniated discs, that the extruded disc material
is often
not responsible for the pain. Needless to say, the physicians
who perform these operations do so with the sincere convic-
tion that an offending substance is being removed; this is the
concept that governs the decision to do surgery and it is widely
held. Nevertheless, because of my therapeutic experience I am
forced to the conclusion that surgery may sometimes produce
a desirable result because of the placebo effect. The strength
of a placebo, meaning
its ability to achieve a good and per-
manent effect,
is measured by the impression it makes on the
person's mind. This is why surgery is probably a very powerful
placebo.
That fact was brought to the attention of the medical world
in 1961 ("Surgery as a Placebo," Journal ofthe American Med-
ical Association, Vol. 176, p. 1102) by the same Henry Beecher
who reported on the reactions of men wounded in battle (see
chapter 7 on the mind and body). One hesitates to impugn
the value of surgery, but there
is considerable anecdotal evi-
dence of its failure in many cases. As has been stated through-
out this book, TMS rather than disc herniation appears to be
the cause of pain
in most
cases. Therefore, the removal of
herniated disc material may not address the basic problem.
There is another treatment which might be characterized as
pseudosurgical since its purpose, as with surgery, is to remove
herniated disc material. Chymopapain is an enzyme which can
be injected into the extruded toothpaste-like disc material and
will digest (dissolve)
it. This procedure is less formidable than
an operation but must bear the same criticism as surgery since
the herniated disc material may not be the cause of pain. Fur-
ther, serious reactions to this enzyme have been reported in
the medical literature.
Cervical traction, which can actually distract (pull apart) the

126
Healing Back Fain
cervical bones to a slight degree,
is another attempt to alter a
structural abnormality—in this case to try to make the cervical
foramina larger. These are the holes formed by two spinal
bones through which the spinal nerves make their way. The
idea
is
to make
the
holes
larger
so
the
nerves won't be
"pinched." But we have said before that the idea that they are
being pinched is usually fantasy and, once again, there is much
ado about nothing.
Treatments to Strengthen Muscles
For years the doctrine of strengthening back and abdominal
muscles to protect the back or
relieve
it of pain has been
preached across the length and breadth of the land.
It
is an
idea that is deeply ingrained in the American mind—and it is
dead wrong. Programs are taught in the YMCA, exercise
is
prescribed by thousands of doctors, and people are trained by
a large variety of therapists.
There
is nothing wrong with doing these
exercises and
strengthening these muscles;
it's a very good thing (I do them
myself). But,
I
tell my patients, they will neither make your
pain go away or protect you from
it, and if they do you are
having a placebo effect.
What about using exercise to get you going, to break your
fear of physical activity? That
is a very different story and a
very good use for exercise.
Dr. Hubert Rosomoff, mentioned in connection with his
repudiation of the significance of disc pathology, has a large,
successful program for the conservative treatment of persistent
pain syndromes associated with the School of Medicine
in
Miami, Florida. His program of physical activity is both vig-
orous and rigorous from all reports. It is my impression, how-
ever,
that though
his
patients improve and become more
functional, many continue to have pain. From my point of

The Traditional (Conventional) Treatments
127
view this is inevitable since the basic cause of the disorder has
not been identified and addressed.
Only very occasionally will
I refer a patient to a physical
therapist and then only for help in overcoming fear and re-
luctance to do physical exercise.
Treatments to Increase
Local Circulation ofBlood
There are a number of physical treatments that will increase
the flow of blood into an area by increasing the temperature
of the tissue. Heat can be generated within muscle, for ex-
ample, by the use of shortwave or ultrasonic radiation. Deep
massage and active exercise will do the same thing. Contrary to
what one might expect, a hot pack will not increase blood flow
since the heat does not penetrate the skin, let alone reach the
muscle. Paradoxically, an icepack may increase it by stimulating
a reflex response to the cold.
But what does one accomplish by doing this? Unless the
pain is somehow the result of decreased blood flow or reduced
oxygenation resulting from some other mechanism, increasing
available oxygen
is of no value.
As the reader is aware,
it is our hypothesis, now supported
by rheumatology research, that oxygen deprivation is precisely
the mechanism of TMS muscle pain. Nevertheless,
I do not
use these therapeutic modalities because they are only of tem-
porary value and because they are physical. The rationale for
this decision was discussed
at length in the chapter on the
treatment of TMS.
The application of hot or cold packs, the use of radiation
(these days mosdy ultrasonic), deep and superficial massage
and active exercise are widely used in the treatment of pain
syndromes, almost regardless of presumed etiology. For ex-
ample, a diagnosis of herniated disc
is made but
it is decided

128
Healing Back Vain
that surgery
is not warranted. In that case, after a period of
rest in bed, physical therapy will often be prescribed if pain
continues, usually consisting of deep heat, massage and ex-
ercise. It is difficult to understand what this is intended to do.
It will not change the anatomical status of the extruded disc
material. It will temporarily increase blood flow and may tone
up muscles, but to what end?
As one who wrote this prescription perhaps thousands of
times many years ago,
I must confess that the rationale was
often fuzzy and there was not a
little wishful thinking
in-
volved: "Do something, and maybe the pain will go away,"
"Strengthen the abdominal and back muscles to support the
spine," "Relax the muscles," and so forth.
If the physical therapist was particularly talented the results
were often very good. Alas, here again was the placebo re-
sponse at work, meaning that the result was usually not per-
manent. However,
if the therapist remained available to the
patient, another round of therapy might result in pain relief
for a few more weeks or months. But the patient continued
to live a life circumscribed by many prohibitions and admo-
nitions and the always present fear of a recurrence of pain.
Treatments to Combat Inflammation
My immediate response to any treatment to combat inflam-
mation
is, "What inflammation?" To the best of my knowl-
edge, no one
has
ever demonstrated
the
existence of an
inflammatory process in any back pain syndrome, and yet enor-
mous amounts of steroidal and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
medication are used in treatment, both prescription and non-
prescription. Judging the efficacy ofthese drugs is a bit difficult
because most of them have analgesic (painkilling)
abilities as
well. Since there is no inflammation in TMS, one must assume
that improvement with these is due either to their painkilling
function or placebo effect.

The Traditional (Conventional) Treatments
129
With one exception. Steroids (so-called cortisone drugs) will
reduce or banish the symptoms of TMS temporarily in many
patients. I do not know how or why this happens. I see these
people when the pain returns; they have TMS—and they usu-
ally respond to treatment with permanent resolution of symp-
toms.
TREATING CHRONIC PAIN
Near the end of chapter 4 on the treatment ofTMS I described
a program that is in wide use across the country to treat chronic
pain. It bears repeating here that treating pain is not medically
sound. Pain
is a symptom, like fever.
It has been elevated to
the status of a separate disorder on the hypothesis that certain
psychological factors cause the patient to exaggerate the pain.
As stated before, this theory requires that one acknowledge
the continuing presence of a structural reason for the pain
which is then exaggerated.
In my experience, in both the mild and the severe, the acute
and the chronic pain syndromes, in the majority of patients it
is the physiologic changes characteristic of TMS that are re-
sponsible for the pain and not a structural abnormality. These
physiologic alterations result in pain and other symptoms. To
treat those symptoms
is no wiser than treating the fever in
someone with pneumococcal pneumonia.
Where did this new theory come from? The problem orig-
inated with the failure of physicians to accurately diagnose the
reason for the pain. Then, when it became severe, chronic and
disabling, they threw up their hands and hoped that someone
would relieve them of the burden of caring for these patients.
Physicians were happy to
shift the responsibility when the
behavioral psychologists came along with the theory that psy-
chological needs created
a brand-new disorder which they
called chronic pain. Pain was elevated to the status of a disease

130
Healing Back Pain
by psychological
fiat when
frustrated
physicians abrogated
their appropriate role as diagnosticians.
Pain is, has been and always will be a symptom. If it becomes
severe and chronic
it
is because that which
is causing
it
is
severe and has gone unrecognized. Chronicity, in the case of
these pain syndromes,
is a function of faulty diagnosis. The
following case history makes this clear and is a fitting conclu-
sion for this chapter.
The patient was a middle-aged woman with a grown-up
family; she had been essentially bedridden for about two years
when she came to our attention. She had suffered from low
back and leg pain for years, had been operated on twice, and
had gradually deteriorated to the point where her
life was
restricted almost entirely to her upstairs bedroom.
She was admitted to the hospital where we found no evi-
dence of a continuing structural problem but severe manifes-
tations
of TMS. And no
wonder,
for
the
psychological
evaluation revealed that she had endured terrible sexual and
psychological abuse as a child and that she was in a rage, to
put it mildly, and had no awareness of it. She was a pleasant,
motherly sort of woman, the kind that would automatically
repress anger. And so it festered in her for years, always kept
in check by the severe pain syndrome.
Her recovery was stormy, for as the details of her life came
out and she began to acknowledge her fury, she experienced
a variety of physical symptoms—cardiocirculatory, gastroin-
testinal,
allergic—but the pain began to recede. Group and
individual psychotherapy was intense.
Fortunately, she was
very intelligent and grasped the concepts ofTMS quickly. As
the pain reduced, the staff helped to get her mobile again.
Fourteen weeks after admission she went home essentially free
of pain and ready to resume her life again.
This woman did not have the disease "chronic pain." She
had a physical disorder, TMS, induced by fearful psychological
trauma. What a disservice to her if it had been implied that
her pain was so great and persistent because she was deriving

The Traditional (Conventional) Treatments
131
psychological benefit from
it. Thus, just one example of why
I am opposed to this concept.
And as well, my insistence that the treatment of TMS re-
quires an educational-psychotherapeutic approach. Most pa-
tients do not need psychotherapy, but they do need to know
that all of us generate and repress bad feelings and that these
feelings may be the cause of physical symptoms.

7
Mind and Body
One thing that is abundantly clear about the cause and treat-
ment ofTMS is that it is a striking example of what might be
called the mind-body connection. The history of medicine's
awareness of this interaction
is long and checkered. Hippo-
crates advised his asthmatic patients to be wary of anger, which
suggests that 2,500 years ago there was some appreciation of
the impact of the emotions on illness. That concept was dealt
a crippling blow by the seventeenth-century philosopher and
mathematician Rene Descartes, who held that the mind and
body were totally separate entities and should be studied sep-
arately. Matters of the mind were the concern of religion and
philosophy, according to Descartes. The body, he said, should
be studied by objective, verifiable methods. To a large extent
Descartes's teaching remains the model for contemporary med-
ical research and practice. The average physician looks upon
illness as a disorder of the body machine and sees his role as
discovering the nature of the defect and correcting it. Research
in medicine rests heavily on the laboratory, and what cannot
be studied in the laboratory
is widely considered to be un-
scientific. Despite the obvious fallacy of that idea,
it remains
132

Mind and Body
133
the guiding research principle for most medical investigators.
The spirit of Descartes is still very much alive.
CHARCOT AND FREUD
In the late nineteenth century the famous French neurologist
Jean-Martin Charcot gave new life to the principle of the in-
teracting mind and body when he shared with the medical
world
his experiences with
a group of intriguing
patients.
Called hysterics, they had dramatic neurological symptoms, like
paralysis of an arm or leg, with no evidence of neurological
disease. Imagine the effect on his medical audience, however,
when he demonstrated that the paralysis could be made to
disappear when the patient was hypnotized! One could not
ask for a more convincing demonstration of the mind-body
connection.
Among the many physicians who came to Charcot's famous
clinics was a Viennese neurologist, Sigmund Freud. His name
is now a household word, as well it should be, for he developed
the concept of the unconscious mind (subconscious,
if you
wish), without which
it would be impossible to understand
human behavior. However, despite the fact that Freud began
to write on this subject about one hundred years ago, aware-
ness of subconscious emotional activity and its effect on what
people do and how they feel is still largely limited to analytically
trained psychiatrists and psychologists. This is particularly un-
fortunate since disorders
like TMS, peptic ulcer and
colitis
originate in the subconscious and have to do with emotions
that are generated there.
Freud became intensely interested in patients with hysteria
and began to work with them. He was motivated by the ob-
servation that hypnosis might banish the symptom temporar-
ily, but
it did not cure. Eventually Freud concluded that the
dramatic pseudosymptoms exhibited by these patients, which

134
Healing Back Pain
he called conversion hysterical symptoms, were the result of a
complicated subconscious process in which painful emotions
were repressed and then discharged physically. He thought
that the symptoms were symbolic and represented a discharge
of emotional tension. It was his idea that the process of repres-
sion was a defense against the painful emotions. He made a
distinction, however, between the kind of symptoms these
patients had and those which affected the internal organs, like
the stomach and colon. He believed the latter fell into a dif-
ferent category and could not be treated psychologically. He
found that he was able to help many of the conversion hys-
terical
patients through the therapeutic process of psycho-
analysis, which he developed and for which he has become
justly famous.
In my view, Freud's greatest contribution to medicine was
his recognition of the existence of the human unconscious and
his continuous efforts to understand it throughout his career.
His accomplishments stand with those of Einstein, Galileo and
other great, innovative scientists.
FRANZ ALEXANDER
Though Freud may be said to have been the first great pro-
ponent of the mind-body connection, and though he remained
interested in the subject
all his
life,
it was his students who
made the greatest contributions to the field. Perhaps the most
important of these was Franz Alexander, who, with his col-
leagues at the Institute for Psychoanalysis in Chicago, did some
of the most important work of this century in the
field of
psychosomatic medicine. He moved beyond Freud in this field
by asserting that organ abnormalities, like peptic ulcer, were
also induced by psychological phenomena, though different
from those that caused conversion hysterical symptoms. What
he called a vegetative neurosis (like ulcers and colitis) he said
was a physiologic response to constant or recurring emotional

Mind and Body
135
states. He studied disorders of the upper and lower gastroin-
testinal
tracts,
bronchial asthma,
cardiac
arrhythmias, high
blood pressure, psychogenic and migraine headache, skin dis-
orders, diabetes, hyperthyroidism and rheumatoid arthritis. In
each case he thought there was a specific psychological situ-
ation that mandated that particular disorder; for example, sup-
pressed
rage would produce high blood
pressure.
(I
shall
return to this concept later on page 144 when I explain my
theories on the causation of psychologically induced physical
disorders.)
Alexander made another important contribution by review-
ing the history of medical psychology (in Psychosomatic Med-
icine, New York: Norton, 1950) and pointing out that with
the advent of modern
scientific medicine in the nineteenth
century the study of the impact of psychology on health and
illness was abandoned. Modern medicine believed that every-
thing could be explained on the basis of physics and chemistry,
that the body was an incredibly complicated machine, and all
you had to do was learn how
it was put together, how
it
reacted to attacks upon it, and you could create perfect health
and freedom from disease. As was said above, this idea was
first promulgated by Descartes and was a reaction to medicine's
spiritual and mystical past. Therefore, medical science looked
down on Freud and his followers and accused them of being
unscientific.
THE DOMINANCE OF THE
PHYSICOCHEMICAL CONCEPT
OF PATHOLOGY
Alexander thought that he had successfully met the criticisms
of the medical
scientific community by employing rigorous
scientific methods in his work and proclaimed that we were
now about to enter a new era in medicine in which the role

136
Healing Back Fain
of the emotions in health and illness would be appreciated and
vigorously studied. But
alas,
it was not to
be. As Freud's
enthusiastic and talented pupils disappeared from the medical
scene, so did the concept that emotions were directiy respon-
sible for certain medical disorders and played an important
role in others. The Cartesian medical philosophers once more
established their dominance and the emotions were banished
from the field of medical research. The medical journal Psy-
chosomatic Medicine,
established by Alexander and
his
col-
leagues, was taken over by workers whose primary interests
were the laboratory and statistics. If it couldn't be studied in
the laboratory, they said, it wasn't "scientific," ergo the mind-
body idea was unscientific and couldn't be studied.
As the years went by the physical-chemical view of medicine
became so strong that a substantial number of psychiatrists
began to call themselves biological psychiatrists, proclaiming
that emotional
ills were the result of chemical abnormalities
of brain function and that all that one had to do was discover
the nature of the chemical defect in each disorder and then
correct it with a pharmaceutical product. According to them
depression and anxiety are simply derangements ofbrain chem-
icals. Naturally, the developers and purveyors of pharmaceut-
icals were delighted with this turn of events but they did not
initiate it—the psychiatric community did.
The obvious fallacy of this kind of thinking is that there are
undoubtedly chemical changes which can be detected in the
brain associated with both normal and "abnormal" emotional
states but that the chemistry is not the cause but the mechanics
or result of the emotional state. If you treat the patient with
chemicals you are practicing poor medicine by treating the
symptom rather than the cause.
For instance, Mr. Jones
is anxious because he
is facing
fi-
nancial reverses and he is having a variety of anxiety symptoms.
His doctor gives him
a tranquilizer rather than suggesting
something that will help him to deal with the realities of his
situation. This
is poor medicine.

Mind and Body
137
The swing back to a predominantly physicochemical view
of pathology has happened in the last thirty-five years. At this
moment mainstream medicine seems
to be
far away from
showing any interest in mind-body relationships. As recentiy
as June 1985 an editorial writer for The New England Journal
of Medicine, one of our most prestigious publications, wrote
that most of what is known about this subject is folklore. The
editorial brought a storm of protest from around the world
because good research
is beginning to be done in this
field.
But it demonstrated the confidence and arrogance of the loyal
followers of Descartes. Fortunately, some balance was pro-
vided by an equally important medical journal, a British one,
The Lancet, the following month, July 1985, when its editorial
writer commented on the work that was being done in the
field ofmind-body relationships and suggested that the medical
community might begin to pay greater attention to
it. The
editorial wasn't a ringing endorsement for research in this area
but it was certainly more objective and scientific than the New
England Journal editorial.
THE CURRENT STATUS OF
MIND-BODY RESEARCH
If I have painted a grim picture it is because the overwhelming
majority of clinical work and research in the United States
continues to be structurally oriented. There are, however, some
bright spots so
all
is not lost. New ideas always have rough
sledding and are generally rejected when first presented, par-
ticularly if they challenge or go beyond principles that have
been cherished and fruitful for a long time. The most dramatic
and valuable advances
in medicine in the
last one hundred
years have been the result of laboratory discoveries (such as
penicillin), and we owe a great debt to what might be called
the era of laboratory medicine. But we must be able to move

138
Healing Back Pain
forward and
realize that new methods of research may be
necessary, particularly if one engages to study something as
difficult and mysterious as the mind.
Franz Alexander quotes Einstein as having said that Aris-
totie's ideas of motion retarded the development of mechanics
for two thousand years
(also
in Psychosomatic Medicine).
It
would be a pity if Cartesian philosophy were to do the same
thing to the study of the influence of the mind, particularly
the emotions, on the body.
Why do contemporary physicians have trouble with mind-
body concepts?
I believe
it
is because they see themselves as
engineers to the human body. According to them, health and
illness can be expressed in physical and chemical terms, and
the idea that a thought or an emotion could somehow have
an effect on that physicochemistry is anathema. This
is why
my work has been so studiously ignored. I have demonstrated
conclusively that a truly physical-pathological process
is the
result of emotional phenomena, and can be halted by a mental
one. That is, first of all, rank heresy, and secondly, beyond the
comprehension of most physicians. Nothing in their training
prepared them for such an idea, and to them
it smacks of
voodoo.
It reminds them, with a shudder, of the old era of
unscientific medicine before Descartes. Paradoxically, thought-
ful laymen are much more able to accept such an idea because
they are not burdened with a medical education and
all the
philosophical biases that go along with it. Contemporary med-
ical science
is scientifically limited because
it has closed itself
off from further progress, being unwilling to venture out be-
yond the secure boundaries of its familiar technology. It ought
to take a lesson from the field of theoretical physics where old
ideas are constandy being revised in the light of new knowl-
edge.

Mind and Body
139
MY HYPOTHESES ON THE NATURE OF
MIND-BODY INTERACTIONS
Before reviewing
recent progress
in our understanding of
mind-body interactions
it might be well to describe my hy-
potheses bearing on
this
subject. Most of these ideas have
developed as a result of my experience in the diagnosis and
treatment of TMS.
I emphasize that they are hypothetical.
The first, and most basic, idea is that mental and emotional
states can impinge upon and alter, for good or
ill, any of the
body's organs or systems. The mechanism by which this
is
accomplished is unknown to us, though research is beginning
to suggest answers. But that should not disturb us, for no
more can we explain how
it
is that the brain can take the
jumble of sounds that enter our ears and turn them into com-
prehensible words or the myriad shapes and lines we see with
the eyes that mean nothing until the brain has worked on them
and converted them into words or things we recognize. Most
of what the brain does (all subconsciously) is a complete mys-
tery to us. Why, then, are we disturbed because we can't explain
how mental and emotional phenomena can do things to the
brain and the body? Things that happen at Lourdes are real;
things that Indian fakirs do are real; the placebo effect is real.
It
is the job of medical science to study rather than scoff at
them.
Let me emphasize that in my view the mind can influence
any physical process.
The Composition of the Psyche
For almost a hundred years
it has been appreciated that the
makeup of the emotional structure of the mind, what one

140
Healing Back Pain
might call the psyche,
is multifaceted. The psyche appears to
be composed of multiple, sometimes conflicting forces, and
they function primarily below the level of consciousness. We
owe this knowledge largely to Freud, who worked all his life
to understand and describe them. His formulations and de-
scriptions of id, ego and superego are well known.
I do not
possess the background or knowledge required to do a psy-
choanalytic analysis of my observations. What I can do is de-
scribe what
I have seen, present my impressions of what
it
means psychologically, and leave
it to the experts to decide
where these observations
fit in contemporary psychoanalytic
theory.
To make things easy, we can refer to this multifaceted emo-
tional mechanism as the personality. We
all have one and we
are
all aware of some of its characteristics;
for example, we
know if we're compulsive or perfectionistic. But there are im-
portant components of our personalities that we are unaware
of, that are in the unconscious, that may have a profound effect
on our lives. It seems clear that all human beings possess the
same basic parts of the personality structure, though there may
be considerable variation in the composition of these parts and
the relative importance of each part in the life ofthe individual.
For example, everyone has a conscience; in one person it may
be so strong as to virtually dominate his
life; in the next so
weak that his social behavior borders on the criminal.
A very important part of the unconscious personality is that
which
is childish, primitive and, therefore,
narcissistic.
It
is
self-involved, to the exclusion of concern for the needs, desires
and comforts of others. It is me oriented. The size (strength,
influence) of this part varies from person to person. In some
people
it is large and they are, therefore, more liable to react
or behave in self-indulgent or childish ways, though the latter
may be hard to detect since people's demeanor
is always pa-
pered over by adult behavior. Many feelings and behaviors are
no doubt
left over from childhood. Children
feel weak and
vulnerable; they are dependent and they feel that dependency

Mind and Body
141
strongly; they don't think much of themselves; they have a
constant need for approval; they are very prone to anxiety and
quick to anger. They have no patience. To a degree we
all
continue
to generate some of those
feelings unconsciously
right on into adulthood. What varies from person to person
is how much.
Joseph Campbell, the great mythologist, philosopher and
teacher, taught that primitive tribes had rites of passage, by
which boys and
girls became men and women. They were
always dramatic, often traumatic, and always specific and pow-
erful. No doubt they helped diminish the influence of the
residual child by making a sharp demarcation between child-
hood and adulthood. Modern, "civilized" society has no such
rites (the Bar Mitzvah and Confirmation come closest but they
are certainly not as powerful), and
it may be that we suffer
from the
lack of them.
If the
line between childhood and
adulthood is blurred we may retain more of our childish ten-
dencies despite chronological age.
It is possible that the anxiety that is a part of everyone's life
stems from the response of this part of our emotional systems
to the stresses and strains of daily existence. The greater the
stress, the more anxiety
is generated. And,
as stated in the
psychology chapter, the same goes for anger.
Anger may be one of the most important and least appre-
ciated of the emotions we generate. The celebrated psychoan-
alyst and ethicist Willard Gaylin published a book in 1984
tided The Rjage Within, which explored the subject of anger
in modern man. Because anger
is so antithetical to our idea
of appropriate behavior in a civilized society we tend to repress
it at the very moment it
is generated in the unconscious and
so remain unaware of its existence. There are many reasons,
most of them unconscious, why we repress anger. They were
enumerated in the psychology chapter (see page 38).
The tendency to repress undesirable emotions is a supremely
important element of one's emotional life and, again, we are
indebted to Freud for the concept. We
repress
feelings of

142
Healing Back Pain
anxiety, anger, weakness, dependency and low self-esteem, for
obvious reasons.
At the other end of the emotional spectrum there
is what
Freud called the superego; this
is our Moses. It tells us what
we should and should not be doing, and
it can be
a hard
taskmaster. In fact, it adds to the pressures that make us anxious
and angry and so actually contributes to the tensions within
us. As
I have said earlier, people who get TMS tend to be
hardworking, hyperresponsible, conscientious, ambitious and
achieving, all ofwhich build up the pressure on the beleaguered
self.
One further observation. Just as there is a powerful tendency
to repress undesirable emotions, there seems to be an equally
strong drive to bring them to consciousness.
It
is this threat
to overcome repression that necessitates the creation by the
brain of such things as TMS, ulcers and migraines.
TMS as an Example of
Mind-Body Interaction:
The Principle ofEquivalence
We can now proceed to an examination of the question of
where TMS
fits into the broader mind-body scheme.
It
is
certainly a prime example of such a reaction. I see it as one of
a group of physical reactions,
all generated for the same pur-
pose. TMS
is equivalent to peptic ulcer, spastic colitis, con-
stipation,
tension
headache,
migraine
headache,
cardiac
palpitations, eczema,
allergic
rhinitis (hay fever),
prostatitis
(often), ringing in the ears (often), and dizziness (often). This
is a partial
list, but represents the most common of such re-
actions. Anecdotally,
I have seen laryngitis, pathological dry
mouth, frequent urination and many others serving the same
purpose.
I
believe
these
disorders
are
interchangeable and
equivalents of each other because many of them are found to

Mind and Body
143
occur historically in patients with TMS, sometimes at the same
time, but often in tandem.
I recently saw a patient who re-
ported that he had been having severe migraine headaches
(probably tension headaches from his description) but ever
since his low back pain and sciatica came on the headaches
had ceased.
Equivalence is also suggested by the fact that patients often
report resolution ofone of these disorders when the TMS pain
goes away. This happens most commonly with hay fever.
I
teach patients that all the conditions on the list serve the same
purpose psychologically.
Consider the following excerpt from a letter I received just
a few months ago. The man first wrote that his wife, a back
pain patient, was doing very nicely. And then this:
"You may remember that after the lecture I approached you
and mentioned that I had been suffering from stomach prob-
lems for the past twenty years. You told me that the same
principle applied. Well to my disbelief it worked!
I had been
taking pills of all sorts and Maalox for years—more years than
I'd like to admit. My stomach problems had started in my third
year of high school.
I was unable to eat a meal without the
immediate need to take some kind of stomach medication or
another. By applying your theory and realizing how much the
subconscious mind controls our everyday living, my stomach
problems have completely gone away. Nobody believes me
when I try to explain it to them but I'm sure you understand."
You can be sure no one believes him, for laymen generally
take their cues from the medical profession on health matters
and we have already described medicine's position on such
things.
It
is my judgment that only 10 percent of the popu-
lation would understand that man's experience.
From a theoretical point of view there are some interesting
implications suggested by this equivalence principle. As far as
the group of disorders
I have listed
is concerned,
it deviates
from Franz Alexander's hypothesis that specific disorders have
particular psychological
significance.
In
his
classic book he

144
Healing Back Pain
discussed the psychodynamics he thought responsible for gas-
trointestinal, respiratory and cardiovascular problems. Expe-
rience with TMS and these related conditions suggests that
there may be a common denominator, anxiety perhaps, that
can bring on any one of these disorders. In that case, some
other emotion, anger for example, may be the primary one
that may in turn induce anxiety, which then brings on the
symptom.
Personally,
I have experienced gastric hyperacidity, colitis,
migraine headache,
palpitations and
a
variety of musculo-
skeletal symptoms typical of TMS and know that they were
all the result of repressed anger. Once having learned the trick,
I could usually identify the reason for the anger—and often
turn off the symptom.
It
is interesting to note that most of the disorders
listed
above are mediated through the autonomic nervous system.
As far as we know hay fever
is not but represents malfunc-
tion in the immune system.
I shall return to this later when
we
discuss
the new
field of psychoneuroimmunology
(see
page 148).
The Physical Disorder as a Defense
Against Repressed Emotions
This has been discussed in chapter 2 on psychology, and
it
will be only
briefly reiterated here that the purpose of the
physical symptomatology, whether it
is musculoskeletal, gas-
trointestinal or genitourinary,
is to distract attention, which
is a mechanism for allowing the individual to avoid feeling or
dealing with the undesirable emotions, whatever they may be.
It is, in essence, a lack of desire of the mind to cope with these
feelings. One must make a sharp distinction, however, between
a decision made in the subconscious and one which the person
would consciously make. As pointed out earlier in the book,

Mind and Body
145
TMS patients cope only too well in reality;
it is their uncon-
scious minds that are cowardly. The best evidence of the va-
lidity of this concept is the fact that patients are able to stop
the process simply by learning about
it. The diversion
(dis-
traction) no longer works when it is identified for what it is.
As mentioned in chapter 4 on treatment, many people have
reported resolution of their back pain syndromes after reading
my first book, making it quite clear that they were "cured" by
the acquired information. That could not be a placebo.
Freud and his students recognized that hysterical symptoms
sometimes took the form of pain. Over the years I have seen
a number of patients with severe manifestations of TMS, so
severe that they were usually bedridden. In addition to having
the
classic findings of TMS, that
is, pain on pressure over
certain muscles and involvement of nerves like the sciatic, these
patients often had pain in strange locations and of a bizarre
quality. "I feel as though there is cracked glass under my skin"
is a typical example. Freud would have called this hysterical
pain. Hysterical symptoms involve the sensorimotor system
instead of the autonomic, which
is what distinguishes them
from gastrointestinal symptoms, for example, and suggests that
they have a different psychological cause.
It
is my view that
both TMS and its equivalents and so-called hysterical pain stem
from the same source psychologically but that the magnitude
of the emotional problem may determine which symptoms the
brain chooses.
A Unitary Theory of
Psychologically Induced Vain
In July 1959 Dr. Allan Walters delivered a presidential address
to the eleventh annual meeting of the Canadian Neurological
Society tided "Psychogenic Regional Pain
Alias
Hysterical
Pain." The address was published in the journal Brain in March

146
Healing Back Fain
1961. It was Dr. Walters's contention that the designation of
hysterical pain was not accurate, since in his experience a large
variety of mental and nervous states could induce the kind of
pain usually identified as hysterical, and not just hysteria. (Note
the similarity to what I have just proposed above.) Typical of
hysterical
pain,
it occurred
in locations that did not make
neuroanatomies sense.
Walters proposed the term psychogenic regional fain for this
kind of pain. Psychogenic because it was clearly the result of a
mental or emotional disorder.
(All of the patients had been
thoroughly studied to rule out physical lesions.) Regional, be-
cause the pain involved a particular region of the body without
regard to specific nerve distributions.
My experience supports and extends Dr. Walters's obser-
vations.
I have seen either the pain of TMS, which includes
muscle, nerve, tendon or ligament pain, or psychogenic
re-
gional pain in patients with anxiety states of varying degrees
of severity as well as in patients with schizophrenia and manic-
depressive conditions.
It appears that the brain will choose
from a large repertoire of painful and nonpainful disorders
when it needs to defend against painful or undesirable feelings.
We usually see the regional pain when the emotional state is
severe.
I would further hypothesize that in addition to varying de-
grees of severity of the emotional disorder (for example, mild,
moderate or severe anxiety), individuals repress these feelings
to different levels. One has the impression that in some people
these feelings are so deeply buried that it becomes difficult to
impossible for the psychotherapist to get the patient to bring
them to consciousness. In others the feelings are just below
the surface. Undoubtedly those that are most painful and /or
frightening are more deeply buried.
In my practice, patients with more severe problems, usually
requiring psychotherapy in addition to the educational pro-
gram, account for about 5 percent of those I see.

Mind and Body
147
The Emotions and More Serious Disorders
There are those in medicine who believe that emotions play a
role in
all aspects of health and
illness.
I am one of them.
Alexander suggested doing away with the term psychosomatic
medicine since
it was redundant—everything medical is influ-
enced in some way by the emotions. I believe that all medical
studies are flawed if they do not consider the emotional factor.
For example, a research project dealing with hardening of the
arteries usually includes consideration of diet
(cholesterol),
weight, exercise, genetic factors—but if it does not include
emotional factors, the results, in my view, are not valid.
Before discussing other kinds of medical problems in which
emotions may play a prominent role, it is important to make
it clear that people do not do these things to themselves. It is
not uncommon for patients to say to me after the diagnosis
of TMS has been made, "I
feel terrible;
I did
it to myself."
Upon which
I
tell them that their emotional patterns were
well established long before they reached the age of respon-
sibility and that what they are now is a result of a combination
of
genetic
and
developmental-environmental
factors
over
which they had no control. Might as well take responsibility
for how tall you are or the color of your eyes. Therefore, they
are reacting to life in the only way they know how. Further,
if one begins to understand why one reacts the way one does
and wants to change, some degree of progress
is possible.
Another reaction of a similar nature
is that of physicians
who
resist acknowledging the role of emotions—in cancer,
for example. They say
it
is cruel to suggest to patients that
emotions may have contributed to the onset of the cancer;
it
makes them feel guilty and responsible. My answer to this
is
that
it makes
a world of difference how you introduce the
subject to patients. You don't bludgeon them with the infor-
mation and make
it sound
as though they are emotionally

148
Heeding Back Fain
defective. You explain that they are not responsible
as de-
scribed above, and talk to them about their lives, try to identify
emotional factors that might have contributed to the cancer
process, and then follow it up with concrete suggestions as to
how they can remedy and reverse the negative factors.
I do
not mean to suggest that there is a well worked out therapeutic
process in existence based on such ideas. This
is an area in
which a great deal of research must be done.
THE CURRENT STATE OF THE ART
OF MIND-BODY MEDICINE
Readers who are interested in an excellent review of where
medicine is today vis-a-vis the mind-body connection should
read The Healer Within by Steven Locke, M.D., and Douglas
Colligan (New York: Dutton,
1986). Dr. Locke
is
in the
Department of Psychiatry at Harvard Medical School and has
done an excellent job with his writer-collaborator describing
the history and contemporary efforts to understand how the
mind influences the body.
There
is nothing important in the book with which I dis-
agree. However, I have the impression that the authors focus
too heavily on the immune system and imply that the future
of this field depends upon what they call the "science of psy-
choneuroimmunology." The study of psychoneuroimmunol-
ogy is highly scientific and will play an important role in our
understanding of many serious disorders, such as cancer and
the autoimmune diseases
(like rheumatoid arthritis and dia-
betes), but in my view it is but one segment of a larger study
of how emotions may influence any of the organs and systems
of the body.
TMS
is an example of a mind-body disorder mediated
through the autonomic nervous system; the immune system
is not involved.
I suspect the immune system does not partic-

Mind and Body
149
ipate
in the interaction of emotions and the cardiovascular
system. Once more, one is intrigued by the fact that the brain
crosses boundaries in responding to
its psychological needs.
Thus patients with the same psychological diagnosis (though
differing in severity) may develop TMS, autonomically me-
diated; allergic rhinitis, immune system mediated; or psycho-
genic regional pain, direct action on the sensorimotor system.
Extremely important work is being done in the brain bio-
chemistry section of the National Institutes of Mental Health
on the subject of brain-body interaction. One of the pioneers
in this research
is Candace Pert, once chief of that section,
whose work
is demonstrating communication between the
brain and different parts and systems of the body. For those
interested, an excellent review of this work appeared in the
June 1989 issue of Smithsonian, written by Stephen S. Hall.
The mind and body interact in numerous ways; the follow-
ing part of the chapter reviews some of those more common
interactions.
MIND AND THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM
The subjects of interest to us in the category mind and the
cardiovascular system are hypertension, coronary artery dis-
ease, arteriosclerosis (hardening of the arteries), cardiac pal-
pitations and mitral valve prolapse.
High blood pressure (hypertension),
as everyone knows,
is
very common and a little scary because of its connection with
heart trouble and stroke.
Its association with emotions has
been assumed by many, though never demonstrated in the
laboratory. Dr. Neal Miller, a psychologist working at Rocke-
feller University, demonstrated that laboratory animals could
be conditioned to lower their blood pressure, and modify many
other bodily processes too, clearly showing that the brain could
be recruited to influence the body.

150
Healing Back Fain
Dr. Herbert Benson, a Harvard cardiologist, has described
what he calls the relaxation response and demonstrated that
the blood pressure can be reduced by the application of this
meditationlike process.
A very important study appeared in the Journal ofthe Amer-
ican Medical Association in the April 11, 1990, issue (Vol. 263,
pp. 1929-35). Dr. Peter L. Schnall and a team from the Car-
diovascular and Hypertension Center, New York Hospital-
Cornell Medical College, in collaboration with doctors from
two other New York area medical schools, published a paper
which established a clear relationship between psychological
pressure at work ("job strain") and high blood pressure. The
study also established the fact that there was an increase in the
size ofthe heart in these people, which is one ofthe undesirable
effects of sustained hypertension. Experts have long suspected
that psychological factors were implicated in high blood pres-
sure. The great value of Dr. SchnalTs study is that it was so
carefully designed and executed that it may convince some of
the skeptics of the importance of the mind-body connection.
Many people with TMS report a history of hypertension,
suggesting that the same emotional states may bring on either
of these. Just a few weeks ago a patient called and reported
that her back pain was gone but that she had now developed
hypertension—a clear example of equivalency.
By contrast, it is rare for a TMS patient to report a history
of coronary artery disease or subsequently to develop
it.
I can
document the former but I do not have statistics to support
the latter;
it is a clinical impression.
Almost everyone has heard of the so-called Type A behavior
pattern and of the susceptibility ofType A people to coronary
artery disease, described by Dr. Meyer Friedman and Dr. Ray
Rosenman
in
their 1974 book, Type A Behavior and Tour
Heart.
Type A people were described as extremely ambitious, ag-
gressive, loving competition, obsessively hard workers, often
putting themselves under great time pressure, having much

Mind and Body
151
need for recognition and very hostile. Because of their ten-
dency to be compulsive, perfectionistic and very responsible
and conscientious, people with TMS often describe themselves
as Type A. They
are,
in
fact,
different in some important
respects. Many TMS patients are the antithesis of hostile; they
often have a strong need to be good, nice, pleasant, accom-
modating and helpful. Though they may be ambitious and
often very accomplished, they do not necessarily pursue their
goals with the intensity that seems to be characteristic of the
Type A person.
After the publication of Type A Behavior and Your Heart a
great deal of research was done in an attempt to clarify the
relative importance of the various Type A traits.
It has been
suggested that of all those listed above, hostility may be the
only one that predisposes someone to coronary artery disease.
To someone who is aware of being angry a lot this can be
disturbing, whether or not he or she has TMS.
It
is of great
interest to me because of the increasing evidence that repressed
anger is important in the psychological dynamics ofTMS. But
then how does one reconcile those facts with the clear statistical
evidence in the TMS population that coronary artery disease
is very rare?
It is apparent that a great deal more research and thinking
is needed to unravel this mystery. It is dangerous to focus on
a trait like hostility without knowing a great deal more than
we do about the psychodynamics of anger, or about the myriad
details of people's personalities. The man who swears at taxi
drivers as he drives down the street may be displacing his anger
at his boss this way, for it is far better than losing his job. Or
it may be much more complicated than that.
The problem with the behavioral research typified here
is
that
it
is unidimensional.
It draws conclusions based upon
oversimplified models of human behavior. This
is one of the
weaknesses ofcontemporary research in this area. In an attempt
to produce
statistically valid conclusions
it must use criteria
that are measurable, and while this
is appropriate,
it places a

152
Healing Back Pain
great burden on the investigator to be absolutely sure that he
knows what he
is measuring. This
is perfectly illustrated by
the history of Type A behavior research.
To make matters worse for the poor person who sees himself
angry a lot of the time,
it
is suggested that he stop doing
it!
This makes him downright desperate. He has been told that
this kind of behavior
is liable to give him a heart attack and
to avoid it he had better stop being who he
is.
I would not presume to advise anyone who believes that he
or she
is a Type A person.
I
tell my TMS patients that, sta-
tistically, they appear not to be prone to coronary artery dis-
ease. If they are aware of being angry a lot of the time, they
are already ahead of the game, because they are aware. If they
are
really concerned about
this tendency
I am prepared to
introduce them to a psychotherapist who will help them to
learn more about why they behave as they do. In my experience
awareness is very good medicine.
The wonderful thing about the whole Type A story is that
it has convinced some of the medical community that what is
going on in the mind may be of great importance to what's
happening in the body—at least as far as coronary artery dis-
ease
is concerned.
Hardening of the arteries,
arteriosclerosis, the deposition of ar-
terioscleroticplaques—these all mean the same thing. Since what
narrows the coronary arteries are arteriosclerotic plaques and
a relationship has been established between emotions and cor-
onary artery disease, one
is tempted to theorize about hard-
ening of the arteries in general. Arteriosclerosis refers to the
laying down of these crusty plaques on the inside of blood
vessels that may retard the flow of blood or be the basis of
blood clots that then occlude the artery. In the light of the
work of Dr. Friedman and Dr. Rosenman, it is hard to escape
the conclusion that emotions may play a role in hardening of
the arteries wherever it occurs, though it is clear that genetics
(it pays to pick the right parents), blood pressure, diet, weight
and exercise all play important roles.

Mind and Body
153
An important report was published in the prestigious British
journal Lancet in July 1990 (Vol. 336, pp. 129-133). A large
team headed by Dr. Dean Ornish of the University of Cali-
fornia San Francisco School of Medicine did a randomised,
controlled study in which they demonstrated that
life-style
changes (practised for a year) could actually reverse the process
of atherosclerosis (arteriosclerosis, hardening) in coronary ar-
teries. The patients in the experimental group were put on a
low-fat, low-cholesterol vegetarian diet; participated in stress-
management
activities
like meditation,
relaxation,
imagery,
breathing techniques and stretching exercises; and did mod-
erate aerobic exercise regularly. In addition, there were twice
weekly group discussions to provide social support and rein-
force adherence to the life-style change program. The control
(nonexperimental) group of patients snowed an increase in
coronary atherosclerosis. With the decrease in blockage of the
coronary arteries, experimental patients also experienced a re-
duction in the frequency, duration and severity ofangina (chest
pain) while the control group had an increase in angina over
the one-year period.
This obviously important report shows what has long been
suspected:
that
it
is not just diet, exercise and other purely
physical factors that determine whether or not there will be
hardening of the
arteries but psychosocial factors as well.
I
predict that further experimentation will identify the person's
emotional state as being the most important variable and that
intensive psychotherapy alone will demonstrate a similar re-
versal of atherosclerosis.
Heart palpitation to the layman usually means a very rapid
heart rate. The medical term for this is tachycardia, with rates
from 130 to 200 beats a minute. The most common form of
this
is paroxysmal
auricular tachycardia (PAT)
and,
in my
experience,
it
is
usually induced by emotional
factors. Re-
gardless of that,
it should always be treated by one's family
doctor, internist or cardiologist. Ideally, the emotional reason
for the attack should be explored.

154
Healing Back Fain
Irregularity of heart rhythm may also be referred to as pal-
pitation.
I have experienced these intermittently
all my
life
and, again, they are clearly the result of emotional things. They
too should be investigated and managed by your doctor to be
sure they are not the
result of a cardiac abnormality.
It
is
generally accepted that these conditions are mediated through
the autonomic nervous system.
Finally, a disorder known as mitral valve prolapse
is a very
common abnormality of one of the leaflets of a heart valve.
The leaflet becomes "floppy" and does not perform normally,
so that a murmur can often be heard.
It sounds scary but is
very common, occurs more often in women than in men, and
seems not to be associated with functional disability.
I have
had it for years and continue to be very active, and I perform
vigorous aerobic activity on a regular basis.
What is intriguing about it is that some doctors think it is
psychogenic, that is, anxiety induced. And there is considerable
evidence in the medical literature that it is related to abnormal
autonomic activity (editorial in The Lancet, October 3, 1987,
titled, "Autonomic Function in Mitral Valve Prolapse").
Recently an
article appeared
in
the
July 1989
issue of
Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation (Vol. 90, pp.
541-43) reporting a study in which 75 percent of a group of
patients with fibromyalgia were found to have mitral valve
prolapse, a higher incidence of this disorder than in the general
population. As I have stated, I believe fibromyalgia to be one
of the forms of TMS.
Since TMS and mitral valve prolapse are both induced by
abnormal autonomic activity and TMS
is clearly the result of
emotional factors,
it is tempting to include mitral valve pro-
lapse in that
list of physical disorders that have their genesis
in the realm of the emotions. Using myself as an example,
I
have experienced TMS, gastrointestinal symptoms, migraine
headache, hay fever, dermatologic conditions and mitral valve
prolapse, and so have a large number of my TMS patients,

Mind and Body
155
suggesting that the same thing is at the root of all of them
repressed, undesirable emotions.
Let me repeat a very important point: The idea that emo-
tions can stimulate physiologic change is impossible for most
physicians to accept, and they are, therefore, cut off from the
possibility of understanding a large number of ills that now
plague human beings. TMS and mitral valve prolapse surely
fall into that group.
In summary, five cardiovascular disorders probably related
to the emotions have been
briefly described.
It
is of great
interest that three of the five, hypertension, palpitations and
mitral valve prolapse,
are mediated through the autonomic
nervous system.
THE MIND AND THE IMMUNE SYSTEM
Contemplation of the complexity of animal biology
is awe
inspiring and overwhelming. It is impossible to imagine how
something as complicated as we are came to be. Little wonder
that it took millions of years to evolve.
The immune system is a marvel of complexity and efficiency.
It is designed to protect us from foreign invaders of all kinds,
the most important of which are infectious agents, and from
dangerous enemies that are generated within, like cancer. It is
composed of a variety of defense strategies:
it can generate
chemicals to
kill invaders;
it can mobilize armies of cells to
swallow them up; and
it has an elaborate system whereby
it
can recognize thousands of substances that are foreign to our
bodies and then neutralize them.
For years it was thought by immunologists to be an auton-
omous system, though there were disconcerting stories about
patients along the way that suggested that the mind might
have something to do with the way it worked. For the most
part these stories were discounted by the experts, but now

156
Healing Back Pain
there is concrete evidence that cannot be ignored that the brain
is involved in the system.
Robert Ader, a research psychologist at the University of
Rochester, was engaged in an experiment in which he was
trying to condition rats to dislike saccharin-sweetened water.
This was similar to the classic experiment of Pavlov in which
he conditioned dogs to salivate at the sound of a bell. In order
to develop an aversion to the saccharin, Dr. Ader injected the
rats with a chemical that made them nauseated so that they
associated the sweet water with nausea. What he didn't realize
until later was that the chemical he injected, cyclophospha-
mide, also suppressed the rats' immune systems, so that they
were dying mysteriously. But the striking thing was that now
all he had to do was feed the rats saccharin-sweetened water
and their immune systems would be suppressed, even though
they had not been injected with the chemical, because they
had learned (been conditioned) to associate the sweet water
with the nausea-producing chemical. Now, simply feeding sac-
charin could produce suppression of the immune system. This
was a landmark discovery, for
it demonstrated that a brain
phenomenon, in this case aversion to a taste, could control
the immune system.
It is no wonder, then, that people with TMS can experience
pain under the weirdest of circumstances, like when they are
lying quiedy on their stomachs. They have been told that lying
on the stomach is bad for the back so they become conditioned
to have an aversion to that posture and, naturally, will then
experience pain. As stated earlier, the brain can influence any
organ or system in the body. In the case of Dr. Ader's rats it
was the immune system; with TMS it is the autonomic system.
Something else observed by Dr. Ader and his co-workers
was that rats who had autoimmune diseases improved during
such experiments. This
is because this group of disorders re-
sults when the immune system turns on the body and produces
substances that are harmful to some of the body's own tissues
(rheumatoid arthritis, diabetes, lupus erythematosus and mul-

Mind and Body
157
tiple
sclerosis
are examples of such
diseases). That means
that anything which suppresses the immune system will allow
those disorders to improve, which
is what happened when
autoimmune-diseased rats were fed saccharin water.
The implications of this for human health and illness are
enormous, since autoimmune disorders are among the most
problematic and poorly understood of all categories of disease.
These experiments suggest that the brain might play a role in
the treatment of these conditions.
It further suggests to me
that emotions may play a role in their cause.
In his well-known book, The Anatomy ofan Illness, Norman
Cousins described how he overcame one of these autoimmune
disorders, ankylosing spondylitis
(a form of rheumatoid
ar-
thritis) by recognizing that
it was emotionally induced and
introducing a kind of humor therapy plus vitamin C. Based
on my experience with TMS I am inclined to think that it was
his recognition ofthe role ofthe emotions in causing the illness
that produced the cure. It is possible that, just as in TMS, the
illness serves to draw attention away from the realm of the
emotions and that when the person recognizes that this is what
is going on, and attention
is focused on the emotions, the
illness loses its purpose and ceases.
Those of us who believe that the immune system is heavily
influenced by the emotions are in debt to Dr. Ader for having
shown in the laboratory that this is a reality. He is not alone;
other laboratory scientists have demonstrated equally dramatic
connections between mind and body.
One report that particularly impressed me appeared in the
prestigious journal Science in April 1982 by authors Visintai-
ner, Volpicelli and Seligman. They described a group of rats,
all suffering from the same cancer, that were exposed to an-
noying electric shock under two different experimental con-
ditions; one group could escape from it and the other had to
take it until it stopped. Both groups got exactly the same dose
of shock; the ability to escape from it was the only difference
between the two groups. According to the authors, "Rats

158
Healing Back Pain
receiving inescapable shock were only half as likely to reject
the tumor and twice as likely to die as rats receiving escapable
shock or no shock. Only 27 percent of the rats given inescap-
able shock rejected the tumor, compared to 63 percent of the
rats given escapable shock and 54 percent of the rats given no
shock."
The clear implication of the study was that the immune
systems of the rats that were more emotionally stressed were
less efficient since it is the effectiveness of the immune system
that determines whether a cancer will be thrown off or not.
If this is the case with rats imagine how much more important
the emotions must be in humans.
CANCER AND THE IMMUNE SYSTEM
Since the subject of the emotions and cancer has been intro-
duced,
let's pursue
it further. Though
it is not yet under in-
tensive
research by mainstream medicine,
there have been
many observations through the years that psychological and
social factors may play a role in the cause and cure of cancer.
One of these was reported by Kenneth Pelletier, a member
of the faculty of the School of Medicine, University of Cali-
fornia, at the time. He was interested in "miracle cancer cures"
that had occurred in seven people in the San Francisco area
and wondered if they had anything in common. He found, in
fact, that all seven people became more outgoing, more com-
munity oriented, interested in things outside of themselves;
they all tried to change their lives so that there was more time
for pleasurable activities; all seven became religious, in differ-
ent ways, but all looked to something bigger than themselves;
each spent a period of time each day meditating, sitting quietly
and contemplating or praying; they all started a physical ex-
ercise program and they all changed their diets to include less
red meat and more vegetables.
It certainly looks as though

Mind and Body
159
social and emotional factors played a role in these "miracle
cures."
Pelletier is the author of a well-known book about the mind-
body connection, Mind as Healer, Mind as Slayer (New York:
Delacorte, 1977).
For those interested, there is a book by O. Carl Simonton,
Stephanie Matthews-Simonton and James Creighton
titled
Getting Well Again (New York:
J. P. Tarcher, 1978) that de-
scribes the Simontons' therapeutic technique for treating can-
cer. Theirs is a psychological approach to the problem in which
they seek to understand their patients and find ways of chang-
ing attitudes and concepts since they believe these are impor-
tant to the eventual outcome.
A very popular recent book on the subject is Love, Medicine,
and Miracles by the Yale surgeon Bernie Siegel (New York:
Harper & Row, 1986). Dr. Siegel began his career as a sur-
geon, became aware ofthe social and psychological dimensions
of cancer and began to work with patients accordingly. His
book is highly inspirational and, because of its popularity, has
introduced many people to the idea that the mind can be
mobilized to combat cancer.
There may be some cause for concern about the nature of
Dr. Siegel's work, however, because of its lack of psychologic
and physiologic specificity. He does not present a theoretical
model of how emotions play a role in the cause and cure of
cancer and where his work fits into that model. Lacking that
it
is unlikely that his work will have much impact on the
traditional medical research community.
This
is a pity for there
is
a great need for more precise
definition of what social and psychological factors are contrib-
uting to what illnesses and how. Acknowledging the important
role of the emotions in health and illness, medicine must reex-
amine its concepts of disease causation. The attempt to bridge
that mysterious gap between emotion and physiology will re-
quire the best minds in experimental medicine and the kind

160
Healing Back Pain
of interest and commitment that medicine now accords to such
things as genetic research or the chemotherapy of cancer.
But we won't get those people and that kind ofcommitment
if we put "the power of love" into a medical context without
carefully studying
its
specific psychological and physiologic
effects.
If that
isn't done, how do we distinguish between
Bernie Siegel, Norman Vincent Peale and Mary Baker Eddy?
These considerations aside, doctors like Siegel, Simonton,
Pelletier and Locke (and a number of others I have not men-
tioned) are pioneers, and what they have to teach is of enor-
mous importance to the future of medicine.
THE IMMUNE SYSTEM
AND INFECTIOUS DISEASES
Here again, there is a long history of awareness that the emo-
tions have something to do with our susceptibility to or ability
to fight off infection, but none of it is generally accepted by
medical doctors and rarely applied in everyday practice. Fre-
quent colds and genitourinary infections are among the most
common but
it is likely that psychological factors play a role
in all infectious processes.
As with cancer, it is the efficiency of the immune system to
do
its job of eradicating the infectious agent that
is at issue.
Stressful emotions can reduce that effectiveness and allow the
infection to flourish but there is ample anecdotal evidence that
people have the capacity to enhance immunologic efficiency
by improving their emotional states or employing other tech-
niques, as the following story illustrates.
The cover article of the Washington Post Health Journal for
January 1985 was a piece written by Sally Squires titled "The
Mind Fights Back." In it she described a study carried out by
a team of immunologists and psychiatrists at the University
of Arkansas Medical Sciences in which a woman described as

Mind and Body
161
a "dedicated meditator" who was particularly attuned to her
body's responses was chosen to participate in this interesting
experiment.
Chicken pox virus was injected into her forearm. Having
been previously exposed to the virus, she developed the usual
positive immune reaction, a bump about one-half inch in di-
ameter, which then disappeared in a few days. To confirm that
an immune reaction was going on a blood test was done that
demonstrated that her white blood cells were actively fighting
the infection. After repeating the procedure twice with the
same reaction she was instructed to try to stop the body's
normal reaction, which she did in her daily meditation, and
for three weeks in a row the bump got smaller and smaller.
Then she was asked to stop interfering with the normal im-
mune reaction and with the last three injections of the virus
she got the usual bump again.
Here was a clear demonstration of how the mind can alter
a bodily reaction
if it
is taught how to do
it. The doctors
involved in the study were so impressed with the results that
they repeated the entire experiment nine months later and got
the same results.
Conventional medical research can hardly find fault with
this experiment.
It was a striking demonstration of the so-
called power of the mind, in this case over the working of the
immune system.
.
The treatment of TMS describes a similar phenomenon, in
which acquired knowledge has the ability to interfere with an
undesirable physical reaction, the pain of TMS.
THE OVERACTIVE IMMUNE SYSTEM-
ALLERGY
Though the idea
is controversial,
it is my view, based on ex-
perience with patients who have had both TMS and allergic

162
Healing Back Fain
rhinitis (hay fever), that some of the common allergies of adult
life are equivalents of TMS, that
is, they are brought on by
emotional factors. People invariably say when this is discussed,
"Oh, but hay fever
is caused by things like pollens, dust and
molds; how can you say it's due to tension?" If ten people are
standing in a field of grass pollen, not all of them will begin
to sneeze, only the allergic ones. What is the difference between
the nonallergic and the allergic people? The immune systems
of the
latter have become overactive under the influence of
tension, the repressed feelings we have been talking about.
This has been demonstrated, not occasionally, but repeatedly
in TMS patients who have been told in the course of their
learning experience that hay fever is a TMS equivalent and can
be eliminated in the same way that TMS can. And they do
it.
Mr. G. reported at one of the small group meetings that he
has suffered from fall hay fever for seventeen years—but not
this year! He took to heart what he had heard and, miracle,
experienced no hay fever that season.
For years
I have been
allergic to whatever
it
is that cats
exude (we used to call it dander but now we're told it may be
something in their saliva which dries on their meticulously
licked fur and then floats into the air). If I walk into a house
and don't know that a cat lives there, my eyes begin to itch.
I usually start rubbing them without thinking. Then kitty walks
into the room and I say, "Ah—now I know the reason for the
itchy eyes," and they stop itching. That happens because
I
know that allergic rhinitis and conjunctivitis are two of my
mind's tension repertoire, and as stated in chapter 4 on treat-
ment, to recognize these conditions for what they are
is to
invalidate them—and symptoms then cease.
Most of the medical community rejects the idea that emo-
tions have anything to do with allergy. These two examples
can't be explained in any other way. They show that something
is at work besides an autonomous immune system reacting to
inhaled substances; how could one get the symptoms to stop

Mind and Body
163
simply by thinking? Clearly, the same mental-emotional dy-
namics are at work here as those described in the treatment
chapter.
I do not have evidence that this "knowledge therapy" will
work with any of the other common allergies and so I will say
nothing about them, except
if I had one of them
I would
certainly zero in on emotional factors in my life.
Incidentally, acknowledging the role of emotions does not
preclude the use of conventional medical treatment.
MIND AND THE GASTROINTESTINAL
SYSTEM
This is the one area where there is a tradition for recognizing
the role of emotional factors, among physicians and laymen
alike. However, while most people would still say that ulcers
are caused by tension, doctors are trying very hard to prove
that they are not. Peruse any medical journal specializing in
disorders of the gastrointestinal system (there is one with the
colorful name Gut ) and you will find many articles suggesting
a variety of purely "physical" causes, with nary a mention of
emotions. This is in keeping with the trend already mentioned
to focus more and more on the physics and chemistry of illness.
In the course of my work with TMS over seventeen years
I have seen a consistent correlation with gastrointestinal (GI)
conditions.
Patients will often have
a history of heartburn,
hiatus hernia (which seems to be part of the ulcer syndrome),
peptic ulcer, irritable bowel syndrome, spastic colon, consti-
pation or "gas," to name the most common. These are things
they have usually had prior to their pain problems.
As with TMS, they are the
result of what
I have called
abnormal autonomic function, in turn stimulated, in my view,
by the same emotional factors that are responsible for TMS.
They are less common now than they were thirty or forty years

164
Healing Back Pain
ago, but that is because TMS has become the preferred physical
defense against anxiety and anger. Another likely reason is the
advent of excellent anti-ulcer medications. Since the drugs can
eliminate the symptoms, there is no longer anything to capture
the person's attention, which is the purpose of a psychophys-
iologic process—so the
brain chooses something
else,
like
TMS. This decline in incidence has been documented in med-
ical literature.
The most striking evidence that these GI conditions
are
emotion related and can be attacked in the same way as TMS
is the story ofthe man who accompanied his wife to the lectures
and experienced relief of his lifelong stomach symptoms on
learning how the mind effects the body (described earlier in
this chapter).
MIND AND HEADACHE
Persistent or recurrent headache should always be investigated
by one's regular physician. Though rare,
it may be a sign of
something serious like a tumor.
I don't intend an exhaustive review of the subject of head-
ache here but simply will say that in my experience the majority
of headache
is of the tension variety, which makes
it a close
relative of TMS. I suspect the mechanism is exacdy the same,
with constriction of small blood vessels feeding scalp muscles.
As with TMS, the basic cause
is tension, as we have defined
it, and there is a wide variety of patterns and severity.
Those that involve the back of the head are clearly related
to the posterior neck muscles that are part of TMS. Some
patients report pain
all over the head; others have
it in the
frontal region. A common complaint is of severe pain "behind
the eyes." When they are unilateral (involving one side only),
severe and are accompanied by nausea, people are inclined to
call them migraines. Tension headache can be as disabling as
the worst neck, shoulder or back pain.

Mind and Body
165
Migraine headache appears to have the same underlying
psychologic cause as tension headache but has a different phys-
iology.
I had migraines for a number of years and can speak
with the authority of the sufferer. What distinguishes them
from tension headache
is some sort of neurological phenom-
enon, usually visual, preceding the onset of the headache.
I
had a jagged, curved line that occupied varying parts of my
visual field.
It looked like cracked glass and
it "scintillated,"
that is, it flashed on and off very rapidly. For some reason they
are called "lights." They usually started with a small dot that
obscured a part of the visual field and over a period of minutes
developed into the full-blown pattern described above. The
phenomenon lasted about fifteen minutes, gradually faded out,
and was then followed by the headache, which could go on
to become very severe.
What is a little scary about migraine is that it has been well
established that it is due to constriction of a blood vessel within
the substance ofthe brain. Once I had an episode during which
my speech was incoherent for about an hour, something called
aphasia, the result ofthe temporary constriction of a vital artery
in the speech area of the brain.
But the good news about migraine is that it too is an equiv-
alent ofTMS and can be stopped in precisely the same manner,
at least in my experience.
It happened to me years before
I
knew anything about TMS. I was a young family practitioner,
having an occasional migraine, when I had a conversation with
one of the older physicians in the community who said that
he had read somewhere that migraines might be due to re-
pressed anger. The next time I got the "lights," which meant
I had about fifteen minutes to think, I tried to figure out what
I might be angry about but came up with a blank. However,
to my amazement
I did not get the headache—and
I have
never had another one to this day, though
I continue to get
the "lights" a few times a year.
In retrospect I know very well why I was getting migraines
way back then, and what I was repressing. Now when I get

166
Healing Back Fain
the warning signal I can usually figure out what I am angry
about and am constantly struck by the fact that no matter how
many times I recognize that I have repressed anger, I will do
it again and again, for it is apparendy part of my nature, the
way I developed psychologically, to do this. But see how pow-
erful knowledge can be. By recognizing what I was doing
I
was able to stop a very nasty physical reaction. Just as with
TMS.
MIND AND THE SKIN; ACNE AND WARTS
There appears to be a close connection between these skin
disorders and the emotions. As with virtually all ofthese mind-
body processes there
is no laboratory proof of the causative
role of emotions but there
is certainly a mountain of clinical
evidence. Acne is one of the common "other things" that peo-
ple with TMS have had or continue to have even while they're
having back trouble.
And then there's the story of the man who developed an
itchy rash under his wedding band which disappeared as soon
as he separated from his wife. Other gold rings did not produce
a similar rash.
It has been suggested that other skin disorders like eczema
and psoriasis
are related to the emotions.
I am inclined to
agree but have no evidence one way or the other.
THE WITCH DOCTOR
Evidences of the power of the mind are
all around us. The
placebo reaction
is ubiquitous. Most practitioners owe some
of their success to this phenomenon and some would have no
success at all were
it not for the placebo effect.
Years ago
I found a wonderful example of mind-body in-
teraction in an
article by Louis C. Whiton in the August-

Mind and Body
167
September 1971 issue ofNatural History magazine titled "Un-
der the Power ofthe Gran Gadu" (Vol. 80, No. 7). Dr. Whiton
had been conducting
anthropological
studies
in
Surinam,
South America, for years and was particularly interested in the
ceremonies, rituals and cures of tribal witch doctors from a
group of jungle people known as Bush Negroes. He had been
suffering for two years from a painful condition of the right
hip attributed to trochanteric bursitis (see page 115). It had
been resistant to
all treatment. Accompanied by his personal
physician, five friends and the editor of a Surinamese news-
paper, he traveled forty miles into the forest out ofParamaribo
to be treated by a highly reputed witch doctor named Raineh.
There was a picture of Raineh in Dr. Whiton's article and he
was a very impressive-looking man.
Described in great detail by Dr. Whiton, the ceremony be-
gan at midnight and went on for four and a half hours. There
were many steps: the patient had to be protected from evil
spirits,
his soul had to be interrogated about his past
life,
beneficent local gods were attracted, it was necessary to "pull
the witch" out of the patient's body and transfer it to that of
the witch doctor. It was at that point that Dr. Whiton arose
from the ground and found that his pain was gone. The cer-
emony went on to transfer the "witch" from the body of the
doctor to that of a chicken, and concluded with incantations
and other procedures to prevent the "evil" from reentering the
patient's body.
Dr. Whiton was no doubt disposed to having a successful
therapeutic experience for he had confidence in the power of
the mind to heal the body. Nevertheless, that predisposition
was of no value to him here in the United States. He needed
a healer of power and stature—and he found him in the forest
of Surinam.
I do not subscribe to placebo cures for, as I have said else-
where, they are usually temporary. But this story is told because
it is another example of what the mind can do.

168
Healing Back Fain
DR. H. K. BEECHER
Dr. H. K. Beecher
is the name of one of the
first serious
students of pain in the United States. In 1946 he published
an article in the Annals ofSurgery tided "Pain in Men Wounded
in Battle" (Vol. 123, p. 96). For years
it was widely quoted
because of
its most
interesting observation. But now Dr.
Beecher is passing into obscurity for what he had to say is no
longer acceptable to students of pain.
Dr. Beecher questioned 215 seriously wounded soldiers at
various locations in the European theater during World War
II shortly after they had been wounded and found that 75
percent of them had so
little pain that they had no need for
morphine. Reflecting that strong emotion can block pain, Dr.
Beecher went on to speculate: "In this connection
it
is im-
portant to consider the position of the soldier: His wound
suddenly releases him from an exceedingly dangerous envi-
ronment, one filled with fatigue, discomfort, anxiety, fear and
real danger of death, and gives him a ticket to the safety of
the hospital. His troubles are over, or he thinks they are."
This observation
is reinforced by a report of the United
States surgeon general during World War II, noted in Martin
Gilbert's book, The Second World War: A Complete History
(New York: Henry Holt, 1989), that in order to avoid psy-
chiatric breakdown infantrymen had to be relieved of duty
every so often. The report said: "A wound or injury is regarded
not as a misfortune, but a blessing."
Here
is yet another way in which the mind can modify or
eliminate pain. Good spirits, a joyful attitude, a positive emo-
tional state clearly have the ability to block or prevent pain.
Just how this works one cannot know at this time.
But we do know in part how the therapeutic process in
TMS works. The knowledge ofwhat the brain is about renders
the process purposeless, the abnormal autonomic stimuli cease,

Mind and Body
169
and so docs the pain. What we have yet to discover, and it is
probably beyond our mental horizons to do so at this time,
is how emotional phenomena can stimulate physiologic ones.
That they do is unquestionable, but for the time being we may
have to be content with Benjamin Franklin's observation: "Nor
is it of much Importance to us to know the Manner in which
Nature executes her Laws: tis enough to know the Laws them-
selves."

Letters from Patients
Many patients have written to me, relating their experiences
with TMS and the results they achieved with my book.
I'll let them speak for themselves
.
.
.
Dear Dr. Sarno:
This letter is a follow-up to my letter written to you around
the beginning of July 1987. ... I am happy to report that my
back problem was TMS and I have been able to get rid of the
pain to a degree of about 95 percent. Once in a great while I
notice some pain, but after getting the causes of stress out of
my mind (not necessarily out of my life!) I made major prog-
ress. My worst problem had been the inability to sit, and since
I do office work it was very difficult. I used a chair for months
that is designed to put most of the weight on the knees, but
I can now sit in regular chairs for lengthy periods of time and
don't even think about my back!
170

Lettersfrom Patients
171
Dear Dr. Sarno:
Your letter
.
.
. has finally reached me
.
.
. where I have been
for the past three weeks caring for my sick mother. This has
certainly been a test of whether my back would begin to hurt
again! ... I know my back wouldn't even hurt except for the
fatigue of caring for an elderly person constandy, making the
decision to put her in a "personal care residence"
.
.
. where my
brother lives and then going to her home and spending a week
packing everything and putting the house up for sale. Certainly
a cause for stress!
Anyway, the good news is I have not allowed this situation
to stress me out
I know after I return home
.
.
. and get a
few days of rest I'll be fine.
... I think your TMS theory is accurate and I want as many
people as possible to benefit from your research
Dr. Sarno:
.
.
. My back pain started in my lower back when I was in
my mid-twenties (I am now thirty-four). By the time I turned
thirty, my pain had spread throughout my back, neck and
shoulders. The pain was chronic, and often debilitating. After
useless sessions with my family practice doctor, and then with
a neurologist,
I turned to chiropractic care on a friend's rec-
ommendation. After two and a half years of "adjustments" one
to three times a week, my pain was reduced and under control,
but not permanendy cured. As a naval officer, I have overseas
duty or possibly sea duty in the not so distant future, and I
knew that my dependence on chiropractic care would have to
end
if I wanted to continue my naval career.
It was in the
midst of struggling with this dilemma that a friend of a relative
referred me to your work
... I realized that your stereotype of a TMS sufferer de-
scribed me to a tee. Moreover, your thorough physiological
explanation of TMS made sense to me
as nothing
I heard

172
Healing Back Pain
(from doctors) or read beforehand. What a relief tofinally find
someone who not only understood what I had been experi-
encing, but offered hope as well based on sound medical rea-
soning and experience!
I immediately accepted TMS as my
diagnosis. (My
acceptance was
probably
hastened by
the
knowledge that a veteran Navy back specialist had recendy
conducted a detailed examination of a complete set of back
and neck X rays, and concluded that I had no spinal misalign-
ment, no abnormal discs and no signs of arthritis.) After two
more readings of your book, and about two months' time, my
back and neck pain had essentially disappeared. A couple of
weeks
later the pain
returned, but
I simply refocused my
thoughts on the TMS diagnosis, and the pain disappeared once
again after about a week. Since that time, I have experienced
a couple of other relapses, but the same type of knowledge
therapy quickly defuses them, and the relapses are becoming
progressively shorter in duration.
... I consider my TMS under control.
I know that
it will
probably never go away completely, but I feel confident that
I can control it without depending on a chiropractor or medical
doctor or anyone else. I am enjoying my wife and small chil-
dren once again, my naval career is back on track, and I have
great hope for the future
Dear Dr. Sarno:
... In 1970
I was diagnosed
as having a slipped
disc.
I
managed pretty well until 1979 when I had another bad bout.
A second doctor (I saw four that year—two said slipped disc,
two said not) told me I had two vertebrae too close together
and this caused a muscular imbalance. I did exercises religiously
twice a day (thereafter until this spring). They got me out of
bed
(I spent a lot of 1979 in bed) but I was never as good.
Then in 1986 I got worse. The insides of my upper legs were
trembly and ached a lot.
I was getting scared.
I feared back
surgery, because the results are so mixed with people.

Letters from Patients
173
After reading your book,
I began ignoring the pain and,
more crucially, quit fearing the pain and now I do what I want.
I still have some discomfort but I keep going and it dissipates.
This is a wonderful book. The syndrome you can get into,
the vicious circle of pain, bed rest, more pain, fear, fear, fear.
It hems you in and
is so depressing.
I waited a few months
to see if this was really going to work over the long haul.
It's
going to, so I'm writing to say: Thank you.
Dear Dr. Sarno:
... It is now approximately sixteen months since I recovered
from what was diagnosed as a herniated L-5 disc with sciatic
nerve pain.
I had seen two well-respected orthopedists asso-
ciated with [a noted] Medical School and a chiropractor before
reading your book, all of whom assured me that my CT scan
findings and clinical symptoms made my diagnosis certain.
I
was ordered to remain in bed for several weeks, given anti-
inflammatory medications, and told to hope for uncertain re-
covery.
For almost four months I lived with considerable pain and
terrible limitations of my mobility.
I work as a clinical psy-
chologist and had to
lie down to see patients. Driving was
terribly painful, and I felt that I could only walk short distances.
My previously active, athletic life-style was becoming a mem-
ory. As my incapacitation dragged on, I worried about needing
surgery the outcome of which was uncertain.
Upon initial reading of your book, I was skeptical, though
I could not help but become excited. Despite my training as
a psychologist,
I had accepted the mechanical explanations of
disc injury offered by the orthopedic doctors without question.
I had noticed that my pain was worse when I was tense, but
this didn't alter my view of my "injury." Your book offered
an alternate, scientifically plausible explanation for me to con-
sider.
It was clear to me that
I thought about little but my back

174
Healing Back Pain
and
leg
pain, and
I was extremely
fearful about my every
movement. The image of further injuring my spine was always
with me. As I read your book,
it occurred to me that my first
symptoms had occurred around the time of an emotionally
stressful event. I had once before suffered from gastrointestinal
problems during a stressful time, so that the thought that my
back problem might have started as a somatization disorder
made some sense to me.
On the advice of a friend who had also been "cured" by
your book,
I tried becoming more active, despite my pain.
While my first forays into increased activity were terrifying, I
soon realized that they didn't make my pain worse.
I
also
noticed that the pain moved from one leg to another, despite
my CT scan showing a protrusion on only the right side. This
observation was very encouraging. I recall the moment when,
after walking around the block and noticing pain in my left
as well
as right leg,
I started laughing with joy. You were
right! This whole ordeal was muscle tension—my life wasn't
really ruined!
Within two weeks after this realization, I had my life back.
I began taking long walks and sitting normally. The pain was
diminishing gradually.
I noticed that when someone men-
tioned the word disc in a conversation, my pain increased.
I
had to reread your book several times to keep my confidence
going, and
after each reading, my pain lessened.
I avoided
contact with my orthopedist and people who believed that
they have structural back problems, because
I was
still too
tentative in my new understanding and the cycle of fear-pain-
fear-pain was readily reactivated by thinking that you might
be wrong.
When
I began to recover,
I saw a physical therapist who
thought that your ideas were plausible and helped me to in-
crease my range of motion and rebuild my muscle strength.
In retrospect, she was most helpful
in making me
feel safe
about moving again.
During the past year I have been unrestricted in my physical

Letters from Patients
175
activities.
I have done many things which should be terrible
for a herniated L-5 disc and sciatic pain, such as fly to Thailand
(twenty-six hours of airplane
sitting), build a room in the
basement,
ski, hike,
lift babies and hike with a backpack.
I
rarely feel sciatic nerve pain, and when
I do
it
is mild.
I no
longer think about my back; instead I think about what may
be making me feel anxious or tense.
I experience my sciatic
nerve as a benign barometer of anxiety.
I know
.
.
. that you have heard many stories such as mine.
I hope that this letter can be of use to others who are suffering
from what for me was an iatrogenic disorder caused by my
orthopedist's misunderstanding of what began as a harmless
somatization problem
Dear Dr. Sarno:
I am delighted to offer my comments concerning your book
and its effect on me.
In the summer of 1987 while playing tennis,
I suffered a
sudden, incapacitating "event" in my back.
I had had some
minor back problems as a teenager but had been symptom free
for over twenty years.
(I am forty-one years old now.) I man-
aged to get to work but when my boss, who had (and
still
has) back problems which eventually led to surgery, saw me
he ordered me home and to a doctor immediately.
At the doctor's office, the orthopedist lugged out the model
of a spinal column showing me how nerves can get wedged
between bone and cartilage and create the terrible spasm I was
experiencing. His advice was to get into bed for two weeks
and to certainly not go on the week-long bicycle trip
I had
planned for ten days hence. I immediately broke out in a cold
sweat over the prospect of missing two weeks of work and
the apparent seriousness of my malady based on that long
convalescence.
Well, I actually stayed in bed for five days and then returned
to work,
still in pain. Unable to sit up for extended periods

176
Healing Back Pain
of time,
I spent a few hours a day on the floor in my office
with my telephone by my side. Then, armed with Motrin and
Robaxin that the doctor described,
I went on the bike trip.
Strangely, I actually found that my back was feeling better as
the week wore on, despite the fact that I was propped up on
a bicycle seat for five hours a day (ah ha, clue #1).
For the next ten months
I had a few other less severe in-
cidents. Each time I had one of these occurrences, I put away
my running shoes and tennis gear and waited for the pain to
subside
(all the while visualizing my spinal cord being sawed
in half by a disc pressing on the vertebrae). Then in the spring
of 1988, coincident with a particularly stressful situation in
my personal life, I suffered an attack that persisted for weeks.
At about the same time, a friend
.
.
. who had had chronic back
problems for years, told me about you. I was dubious—to say
the least
I guess you could say that the two round-trip commutes
.
.
.
to New York that
it took me to read the book changed my
life.
It's embarrassing to think that I am so typical but on the
other hand
it was reassuring to learn how normal I am. The
book made perfectly clear to me that although the back spasms
were indeed real, they were a function of muscles deprived of
sufficient blood flow
While
I feel society may have unrealistic and unfair expec-
tations about the power of self-healing (such as attaching im-
plicit blame on cancer victims for their inability to conquer
their disease),
I am now absolutely convinced that so much
of our well-being is within the grasp of each of us. Your book
has simply showed me the direction to go when a problem
arises.
Dear Dr. Sarno:
Your book was literally a
relief. The attached letter to my
doctor perhaps best sums up my situation

Lettersfrom Patients
177
I hope my written gratitude accurately reflects the reliefyour
book has given to me and my wife. Thank you.
Dear Doctor:
I am writing to tell you how I progressed since
I last saw you in November. When we last spoke,
you had reviewed the results of an MRI I had taken.
At that time I was close to acquiescing to your rec-
ommendation for surgery; I had not improved after
extended bed rest and subsequentiy an MRI appeared
to show a herniated disc.
After
I saw you
I tried a chiropractor, but he
was no help. The pain in my leg would get better at
times and worse at others; there were no definitive
patterns. Then
at Christmastime
I canceled
all va-
cation plans and decided to spend three weeks on my
back. But after one week I was in more pain than
ever. Frankly,
I was terribly worried.
I had almost
resigned myself to adjusting to a restricted life-style.
That
is until a family member sent me a book on
back pain which I feel you should know about.
The book was spectacular because
it attributed
my back pain,
after a thorough description of the
pain and likeness, to muscle spasm brought on by
tension. The cure: to get out of bed and resume life
as normal—get the blood
circulating to cramped
muscles, and relax!
The
first thing
I did after reading the book
and mind you I was in unbearable pain—was get in
the
car,
ditch the back
rest and drive four hours
straight. When I finally parked the car I had no pain.
The following three or four days,
I sat almost the
entire day without a break, and
I took brisk walks
on a sandy beach. The pain increasingly disappeared.
A week and a half later,
I played racquetball for an

178
Healing Back Fain
hour and a half and won
all three games—no pain
whatsoever.
The muscle spasm diagnosis made sense because
no particular incident brought on the pain, rather it
sprang up when
I quit my job to enter graduate
school without having
first been admitted.
I was
trying to change my career field and I had either to
jump then or perhaps never at
all. At that time you
would not have been pulling my leg to have told me
I was "stressed out."
My main objective in writing this account is to
thank you for your time and patience and, most im-
portantiy, to help others
Dear Dr. Sarno:
I want to thank you for how much you have helped my
health and therefore the quality of my life
I had been suffering from severe back pain (both upper and
lower, including sciatic)
for seven years at the time
I called
you. I also had regular severe intestinal cramps, intense sharp
pains in my chest; pain in my knees, ankles, elbows, wrists,
knuckles and one shoulder.
All this pain, especially the back pain, severely limited my
ability to work and play. I could not sweep the floor, do dishes,
pick up babies (or anything over about three pounds, for that
matter) join in sports, etc. Even brushing my hair hurt.
I had been a very strong, active person with a great need
to exert myself physically—which I (and everyone else) blamed
as the cause of my back problems.
On the
first visit to my doctor,
I was told to back off as
much activity as possible, to do nothing that hurt, and that
probably a lot of things would hurt.
I followed that advice. Over the next seven years, I became
an "expert" on the supposed causes and cures of back pain,
but to no avail.
I had fourteen sessions of acupuncture, sev-

Lettersfrom Patients
179
enteen chiropractic sessions, seventeen "body balancing" ses-
sions, thirteen rolfing sessions, several physical therapy ses-
sions, used a "neuro-block TENS unit," attended "bad-back
exercise class," joined a health spa—went swimming and used
a Jacuzzi and sauna, received many massages, etc. One doctor
thought
it might be "primary fibromyalgia syndrome" and
tried putting me on L-Tryptophan and B6 .
All these treatments seemed to help a little at the time, but
I still continued to suffer incredible pain.
After my conversation with you, I considered seeing a psy-
chotherapist, but I decided to try it without one first. I came
to realize that it was not one big underlying problem causing
my tension, but instead any little thing in my daily life that I
had learned to fear and/or that caused tension, would begin
the cycle of pain, more tension, more pain, etc. If the cause
was an unresolved psychological conflict, I noticed that most
of the time I didn't actually have to resolve it for the pain to
go away but instead just be aware that this was the source of
my pain. But I do find that now I tend to resolve things more
quickly than I did before.
I was so mind-blown and happy over the ability to turn a
wrenching spasm into a signal that something must be both-
ering me (emotionally or mentally) and then dissolve the pain
completely within a matter of a minute or less.
It took me four months to get the process under good
control, and within less than a year, I was able to say to friends
and family, "Yes, my back is finally cured. I am free of pain!"
At the same time that my back became free of pain, so did
every single other body part that I mentioned earlier. Finally
I could work and play again like
I had not done for seven
years. What a relief!
I will always be grateful to you, Dr. Sarno, for having the
courage and kindness to do what you've been doing for over
twenty years—helping people become permanentiy free of dis-
abling pain.
Thank you.

180
Healing Back Pain
Dear Dr. John Sarno:
... I am greatly improved and now lead a normal active life
compared to one of pain and suffering.
I do try to inform
others whom I think would also benefit from your work.
I just want you to know that you are gready appreciated by
someone who has never met you—but who has been gready
influenced by your special quality.
Again—my heartfelt thanks.
Dear Dr. Sarno:
.
.
. Reading your book changed my life. I had chronic pain
and had tried many "cures" none of which helped until I read
your book.
Dear Dr. Sarno:
For six months last year I experienced intense lower back
pain. Within two weeks of learning about your TMS theory,
my back pain went away. I feel extremely grateful to you and
want to tell you my story of your long-distance influence on
me.
In July 1988, after jogging one morning,
I
felt my lower
back tighten and a pain radiate down the back of my left leg
all the way to my foot. Within twenty-four hours my back
hurt so much, I went to my chiropractor. I immediately began
following his treatment plan of lying on my back for a few
days while icing it as often as possible, followed by beginning
mild stretching exercises, stationary bicycling, using a lumbar
support, and subsequendy a back brace. He told me
I had
tight muscles, unstable ligaments in the lower spine area, and
probably a minor disc injury.
I followed this treatment plan
faithfully because
I trust and
like my chiropractor and had
experienced successful treatment for previous injuries to my

Lettersfrom Patients
181
neck and hip muscles.
I continued working, lying down fre-
quently and taking short walks regularly.
Unfortunately, the pain did not diminish. Instead it seemed
to gradually get worse and worse. For a few weeks in August,
while on vacation,
I
felt mild relief, but when I returned to
work, the pain was as bad as ever.
I believed, as
I was told,
that
I had injured myself, so
I treated myself very carefully:
stopped jogging, adjusted my chair at work with lumbar sup-
ports, was careful how I moved, and generally began restricting
my life since almost everything I did made my back hurt and
I was afraid it was interfering with the healing process.
By November, the pain was worse than ever. I began a series
of tests in hopes of finding some explanation. My chiropractor
did not think anything serious was wrong but was puzzled,
along with me, that
I was not recovering.
I was tested for
arthritis, had an X ray and MRI and a neurological exam. The
only result from all this was advice from the neurologist to try
swimming—he did not know what was the matter.
By December I was in so much pain that I could barely sit
at work and was having trouble concentrating. Since I am a
psychotherapist, being able to pay close attention to my clients
is essential. With much agony, I decided to take a number of
months off work to try to heal myself.
At this point I was desperate for some solution to this prob-
lem. Hesitandy, I consulted a psychic. She also told me I had
muscle spasms in my back and loose ligaments were preventing
them from healing. She recommended acupressure from a
Chinese specialist. After five to six sessions of excruciatingly
painful treatments, the doctor said (through a translator) that
I should be getting better and was puzzled. When he heard I
was using ice packs and exercising he said, "Oh, no, you should
keep warm, relax and pretend like you're on vacation." Amaz-
ingly, after completely relaxing over the weekend, I felt a little
relief.
So, the following Monday morning in January (1989) when
I received a letter from an old college friend (who knew about

182
Healing Back Pain
my back) and a copy of an article from New York magazine
by Tony Schwartz about his miraculous treatment for back
pain by a Dr. John Sarno, M.D., I was ripe to hear your ideas.
I spent the day on the telephone talking to people my friend
knew, all who claimed the same miraculous cure
and called
your office. I was informed I could see you in about six weeks
and that you would call in two weeks to set up an appointment.
While I waited I began treating myself.
I immediately felt
the accuracy of the TMS diagnosis. Consequendy it was easy
to say to myself that nothing was the matter, I was not injured,
the pain was due to tension and
it would go away.
I
also
practiced relaxing my back using relaxation meditation tech-
niques and I tried to identify the underlying conflict. Since I
have had years of psychotherapy, I was surprised that I would
express unconscious
conflict somatically. But
I decided the
conflict had to do with not standing up for myself.
Within two weeks, the pain was gone in relaxed situations.
Within two months I was as active as ever. If the pain returned
when I went to the movies, I went to the movies every night
for a week and told myself the pain would go away. And
it
did. By the time you called to set up an appointment, I was
well on my way to healing and decided I could heal myself.
By May 1989
I discovered the true unconscious conflict
causing tension
.
.
. and pain in my back. It became clear that
my back pain/tension was part of a group ofsomatic symptoms
occurring during that time
(gastrointestinal upset, repeated
urinary tract infections, frozen shoulder) that were the
first
signs of my body remembering the tension and pain of early
incest experiences.
Over this past year, I have had mild, brief flare-ups of back
pain as
I resist remembering the painful feelings from sexual
abuse. But I know all signs of back pain will be gone when I
have healed the psychological wounds.
Let me say again how grateful
I am to you. Not only did
your ideas provide a framework that allowed me to heal my

Letters from Patients
183
back pain, but they also contributed to my uncovering the
true meaning behind this tension and pain. Now complete
healing has begun.
Thank you very much.

Index
Absenteeism, worker, 47
Accidents, 12, 13, 16
Acne, 49, 166
Activity restriction. See Bed rest; Rest
Acupuncture, 81, 123, 178, 181
Ader, Robert, 156, 157
Advances in Pain Research and Therapy,
101
Age, and TMS, 4—6
Alexander, Franz, 134-36, 138, 143-
44, 147
Allergies, 161-63
see also Hay fever
American Journal of Psychiatry, The, 95
Anatomy of an Illness, The (Cousins),
157
Anesthetic, 123
Anger, 91, 132
and coronary artery disease, 151-52
migraine headaches and, 165-66
narcissism and, 38-44
repressed, 30, 38-42, 44-47, 49, 82,
90, 141-42, 144, 165-66
TMS and, 17, 18-20, 36-37, 47-49,
53-55, 77, 82, 84
see also Rage
Angina, 153
Ankle. See Foot and ankle pain
Ankylosing spondylitis, 157
Annals of Surgery, 168
Anti-inflammatorv medication, 9, 23,
118, 128, 173
Anxiety
about herniated disc, 15-16, 24
producing anger, 39, 43, 44, 45
and TMS, 4, 17, 18-20, 36-37, 53-
55, 62, 77, 84, 92
unconscious, 30, 75, 53, 141
Archives of Physical Medicine and Reha-
bilitation, 154
Arm pain, 8, 25-26, 42
Arteriosclerosis, 152-53
Arthritis, 10, 181
rheumatoid, 148, 156, 157
spinal, 109
Asthma, 48, 49, 132
Autoimmune diseases, 148, 156—57
Autonomic nervous system, 60-61, 62,
144, 145, 148, 154, 163
Awareness, 35, 152
Back pain, 8, 51, 94, 99, 143
acute attack, 14—16
delayed onset, 18, 19
emotional cause, 5-6, 15, 39, 40,
41-42, 48
misinformation on, 98-99
personality makeup and, 34-35
185

186
Index
Back pain (continued)
physical injury attribution, 12-14, 79
and spinal abnormalities, 111
stimulating fear, 54-55
structural diagnoses, 99-119
and TMS diagnosis, 25-26, 47, 80-
81, 88, 171, 173-74, 178-79
traditional diagnoses, 97-119
traditional treatments, 120—31
and vulnerability feelings, 1-2, 54-
55,97
Baker, Russell, 50
Bed rest, 16, 23, 24, 25, 79, 173, 175,
177, 180, 181
as conventional treatment, 122
Beecher, Henry K., 125, 168-69
Behavioral psychology, 77-78, 129-30,
156
Behaviorism. See Conditioning
Bending, 27
Bengtsson, A., 62-63
Benson, Herbert, 150
Biofeedback, 124
Biological psychiatrists, 136
Blood circulation
arteriosclerosis and, 152-53
emotions reducing, 60, 61-63, 70,
165-66, 177
increasing, 70, 127-28
Bone spurs, 106, 114
Brachial plexus, 107
Brain, 60-61, 65, 68, 73, 78-79, 149
see also Mind; Mind-body interactions
Brain (publication), 145-46
Bursitis, 10, 11, 75, 167
discussion of, 115-16
Bush Negroes, 167
Buttocks pain, 6, 8, 14, 26, 94, 103, 117
Campbell, Joseph, 141
Cancer
emotions as factor in, 147-48, 157-
58
and immune system, 148, 157-60
miracle cures, 158-59
placebo treatment, 121
Cardiac palpitations, 142
Cardiovascular system, 149-55
Carpal tunnel syndrome, 10
Cats, 162
Cervical traction, 125-26
Charcot, Jean-Martin, 133
Chemical physiology. See Physiochemi-
cal concept of pathology
Chest pain, 8
Childhood
abuse and TMS, 49, 53, 85-86, 130,
182
elements in adult unconscious, 140-
41
resentments and TMS, 46—47
TMS manifestations in, 4
Chiropractic care, 171-72, 173, 177,
179, 180, 181
see also Manipulation
Chondromalacia, 10, 114
Chronic pain, 25, 41, 95
treatment of, 129-31
Chymopapain, 125
Coccydynia, 117
Coen, Stanley, 47-48
Colds, 160
Colitis, 45, 47, 49, 62, 134, 142, 144
Collars and corsets, 93, 122
Colligan, Douglas, 148
Competitiveness, 35-36, 55
Compulsion neurosis, 76
Compulsiveness, 13, 31, 35, 36, 43,
77, 108, 140, 151
Computed tomography. See CT scan
Conditioning, 21-23, 27, 80, 95-96
Congenital abnormality, 11, 48
Conscientiousness, 31, 32, 36, 142
Conscious mind, 31-32, 73, 74, 78
Constipation, 142, 164
Conversion hysterical symptoms, 134
Coping, 55
Coronary artery disease, 32, 150-51
Corsets. See Collars and corsets
Cousins, Norman, 157
Creighton, James, 159
CT scan, 24, 83, 87, 100, 102, 103,
104, 173, 174
Defense mechanism, 46, 47-57, 72-
77, 134, 144-45
Degenerative process, 11, 48
Demerol, 123
Descartes, Rene, 132-33, 135, 138
Diabetes, 118, 148, 156

Index
187
Diagnosis
of psychophysiologic conditions, 51
rejection of, 56-57, 88
traditional, 97-119
Disability, as psychological defense, 52
Disapproval, 45
Disc, herniated. See Herniated disc
Dizziness, 142
"Do Herniated Discs Produce Pain?"
101
Dreams, 33, 46
see also Nightmares
Drugs
anti-inflammatory, 9, 23, 118, 128,
173
painkillers, 16, 23, 123, 128
psychotropic, 56, 136
steroids, 116, 118, 129
for ulcers, 3, 50, 164
Dry mouth, 51, 142
Ear ringing, 49, 142
Eczema, 49, 142, 166
Eddy, Mary Baker, 160
Elbow pain, 9, 10, 117
Electrode shocks, 123
Electromyographic studies (EMG), 7
EMG. See Electromyographic studies
Emotions
blocking pain, 168
and cancer, 147-48, 157-60
and cardiovascular disorders, 149-55
and gastrointestinal system, 163-64
and headaches, 164-65
and immune system, 155-58
painful, 28, 76, 134
and physical disorders, 2, 26, 48, 82,
134-35, 144-45, 147
unacceptable, 28, 30, 34, 73, 84,
144, 155
see also Mind-body interactions; Re-
pressed emotions; specific feelings
Equivalence, principle of, 11, 49-51,
94, 142-44, 150, 162
Exercise, 62, 81-82, 93, 94, 124, 127,
128, 180
Facet syndrome, 108
Family dynamics, 39-42, 44-46
Fassbender, H. G., 62
Fear, 27, 48, 78, 172-73, 174
and emotional repression, 45
losing, 81
of physical activity, 22-23, 24, 52-
53, 75, 79-81, 82, 89, 105, 126-
27
physiological response to, 60
role in TMS, 52-55, 72, 97-98
see also Anxiety
Fear or flight reaction, 60
Feelings. See Emotions
Fibromyalgia, 48, 62-63, 65, 119, 179
discussion of, 114-15
mitral valve prolapse link, 154
Fibrositis. See Fibromyalgia
Fight or flight reaction, 60
Follow-up surveys, 87—91
see also Letters from TMS sufferers
Foot and ankle pain, 10, 117
Franklin, Benjamin, 169
Freud, Sigmund, 34, 36, 46, 133-34,
135, 140, 141-42, 145
Freud: A Life for Our Time (Gay), 46
Friedman, Meyer, 32, 150, 152
Gastrointestinal system, 45, 143, 144,
154, 163-64, 174
see also specific conditions
Gay, Peter, 46
Gaylin, Willard, 141
Genitourinary infections, 51, 160
Germ phobia, 76
Getting Well Again (Simonton, Mat-
thews-Simonton and Creighton),
159
Gilbert, Martin, 168
Gluteal muscles. See Buttock pain
Group meetings, 83-85
Growing pains, 4
Hall, Stephen S., 149
Hardening of arteries. See Arterio-
sclerosis
Hay fever, 49, 142, 143, 144, 162,
163
Headaches
mind and, 49, 164-66

188
Index
Headaches (continued)
see also Migraine headaches; Tension
headaches
Healer Within, The (Locke and Colli -
gan), 148
Healing
biologic capacity, 13
and mind, 167
Heart. See Arteriosclerosis; Cardio-
vascular system; Coronary artery
disease
Heartburn, 45, 163
Heart palpitation, 153-54
Heat treatments, 62, 81, 127-28
Herniated disc
discussion of, 100-105
pain attributed to, 8-9, 15, 19, 24,
54
and successful TMS program, 87
traditional treatments for, 122, 125,
127-28, 173-74, 175, 177
Hiatus hernia, 49, 163
High blood pressure. See Hypertension
Hip pain, 10-11, 75, 113, 116, 117,
167
see also Bursitis
Hippocrates, 132
Hives, 49
Holiday syndrome, 20
Holmes, Dr., 64
Horney, Karen, 43
Hospitalization, 23
Hostility, 151
Hot pack, 127
Howard A. Rusk Institute of Rehabili-
tation Medicine, 71
Hypertension, 135, 149-52
Hypnosis, 95, 133
Hysteria, 133-34, 145-46
Ice pack, 127
Immune system
and allergies, 161-63
and cancer, 158-60
and infectious diseases, 160-61
and mind, 51, 155-58
and repressed emotions, 5
1
TMS exclusion of, 148-49
Imperatives, behavioral, 43
Infectious diseases, 160-61
Inferiority feelings. See Low self-esteem
Inflammation, 118-19
treatments for, 128-29
Injury-pain link, 1-2, 11-13, 48-49,
79
Insight, 77
Institute for Psychoanalysis (Chicago),
134
Irritable bowel syndrome, 49, 163
Ischemia, 61
Jaw pain, 118
Journal of the American Medical Associa-
tion, 111, 150
Kennedy, John, 56
Kirkaldy-Wallis, Dr., 57-58
Klopfer, Bruno, 121
Knee pain, 10,26, 114, 117
Knowledge therapy, 71, 72, 163
Krebiozen, 121
Lancet, The, 137, 153
Laryngitis, 51, 142
Leg cramps, 14
Leg pain, 7-9, 25-26, 103
see also Sciatica
Letters from TMS sufferers, 170-83
"Life Situations, Emotions and Back-
ache," 64
Lifting, 12, 22, 27
Ligaments. See Tendons and ligaments
Local anesthetic, 123
Locke, Steven, 148, 160
Love, Medicine, and Miracles (Siegel),
159
Low self-esteem, 30, 34-36, 38, 142
Lumbar muscles and nerves, 6, 7, 14,
66-67
"Lumbar Spine: An Orthopedic Chal-
lenge, The," 101
Lund, N., 62-63
Lupus erythematosus, 156

Index
189
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),
19, 24, 83, 100, 103, 177, 181
Magora, A., Ill
Manipulation, 81, 124-25
see also Chiropractic care
Massage, 62, 81, 127, 128
Matthews-Simonton, Stephanie, 159
Mayo Clinic, 123
Migraine headaches, 47, 49, 62, 94,
142, 143
physiology of, 164, 165-66
Millay, Edna St. Vincent, 77-78
Miller, Neal, 149
Mind
emotional structure of, 139-42
see also Conscious mind; Emotions;
Unconscious mind
Mind as Healer, Mind as Slayer (Pella-
tier), 159
Mind-body interactions, 51-57, 132-
69
allergy, 161-63
and back pain, 5-6, 15, 39, 40, 41-
42,48
and cancer, 158-60
and cardiovascular system, 149-55
current research status, 137-38,
148-49
as defense mechanism, 51-57
diagnosis, 51
equivalence principle, 142-44
and gastrointestinal system, 163-64
and headache, 164-66
hypotheses on, 139-48
and immune system, 155-58
and infectious diseases, 160-61
lack of understanding, of, 59
nature of, 139-48
phvsicians' problems with, 2-3, 56—
57, 132-33, 138
physiochemical concept of pathology,
135-37
placebo effect, 166-67
psychologically induced pain, 145-
46
and serious disorders, 147-48
and skin, 166
unitary theory of, 145-47
see also Tension Myositis Syndrome
"Mind Fights Back, The," 160-61
Misinformation, 98
Mitral valve prolapse, 154
Mononeuritis multiplex, 118
Morphine, 123
Motor nerves, 67, 68
MRI. See Magnetic resonance imaging
Multiple sclerosis, 156-57
Muscles
overworking unused, 93-94
oxygen deprivation impact on, 8,
62-64
relaxation technique, 124
spasm, 14, 16, 19, 64, 178, 181
strengthening, 126-27
tenderness in, 6-7
tension, 174
TMS involvement, 5-7, 14, 99, 107
see also specific muscles
"Muscle Tissue Oxygen Pressure in Pri-
mary Fibromyalgia," 62-63
Muscular deficiency,
1
Myofascial pain. See Fibromyalgia
Myofasciitis. See Fibromyalgia
Myofibrositis. See Fibromyalgia
Myositis. See Tension Myositis Syn-
drome
Nachemson, Alf, 101
Narcissism, 37-38, 43, 140
National Institutes of Mental Health,
149
Natural History (publication), 167
Neck pain, 6, 8, 25-26, 42, 47, 48,
50,51,88,95,98, 118
Nerve blocks, 123
Nerves
and oxygen deprivation, 8-9, 65-67
sciatic, 7, 9, 66, 67, 102-3, 113,
145
spinal, 7-8
TMS involvement, 7-9, 65-67, 118
see also Autonomic nervous system;
Pinched nerve
Neuritis, 118
Neuroma, 117
Neuroticism, 46, 85, 134-35
New England Journal ofMedicine, 58,
137
New York magazine, 87, 182
New York Times Magazine, 50
Nightmares, 4, 19
Night pain, 22

190
Index
Numbness and tingling, 7, 15, 25, 61,
66-68, 106-7
see also Pins and needles
Obsessiveness, 32, 41, 52-53, 150
Ornish, Dean, 153
Osteoarthritis, hip, 113
Overcompensation, 34-35
Oxygen deprivation, 14, 82
consequences of, 64-68
fibromyalgia and, 115, 119
TMS and, 8, 61-68, 70, 82, 127
Pain
chronic, 25, 41, 94, 129-31
clinics, 96
conditioned thinking about, 21-23,
24, 95-96
descriptions, 7
as distraction from emotions, see sub-
head secondary gain
emotional, 5, 39, 42
emotions blocking, 168
headache, 164—65
hysterical, 145-46
injury relationship, 1-2, 11-13, 48-
49
location changes, 11, 94. See also
Equivalence, principle of
misconception of causes, 1-2, 11-
13,98-119
night, 22
onset characteristics, 14-20, 23, 24
primary focus on, 25, 41, 52-53
producing fear of physical activity,
52-53
psychologically induced, 40-42,
145-46
recurrent attacks, 23, 24, 83
relief treatments, 122-23
secondary gain, 41, 47-49, 52, 72-
77, 79, 82, 95-96, 144-45
as symptom, 130
syndromes, 2-3, 7, 51, 53, 126
and TMS treatment, 82, 88, 94, 178
traditional diagnoses, 97-117
traditional treatments, 120-31
trigger points, 65-68
triggers for, 12, 17
World War II studies, 168
see also Tension Myositis Syndrome;
specific sites and types
Painkillers, 16, 23
"Pain in Men Wounded in Battle," 168
Panic attacks, 44
Paroxysmal auricular tachvcardia
(PAT), 153
Pavlov, Ivan, 21, 96, 156
Peale, Norman Vincent, 160
Peanuts, 79
Pelletier, Kenneth, 158-59, 160
Peptic ulcers, 3, 49, 50-51, 62, 133,
134, 142, 163, 164
Perfectionism, 13, 17, 31, 36, 43, 77,
84, 140, 151
Peripheral nerves, 7
Personality, 32, 34-35, 140-42, 150-
52
see also specific characteristics, e.g.,
Perfectionism
Personal relationships, 39-42, 46,
171
Pert, Candace, 149
Pharmaceuticals. See Drugs
Physical activity
fear of, 22-23, 24, 52-53, 75, 79-
81, 82, 89, 105, 126-27
restrictions on, 24-25, 52
resumption of, 79-81
Physical defenses, and repressed emo-
tions, 47-51, 53, 72-77, 79, 96,
144-45
Physical therapy, 70, 71, 127, 128, 174
discontinuing, 81-82, 92-93
Physicophobia. See Physical activity,
fear of
Physiochemical concept of pathology,
135-37
Pinched nerve, 8, 106-8
Pins and needles, 7, 27, 66-68
see also Numbness and tingling
Placebo effect, 71, 81, 92, 121-28,
166-67
Plantar fasciitis, 117
Postural muscles, 6-9, 99
Preconscious, 34
Programming. See Conditioning
Prostatitis, 49, 51, 142
Psoriasis, 49, 166
Psyche. See Mind

Index
191
Psychiatry
biological, 56, 136
Freudian, 133-34
Psychogenic regional pain, 146
"Psychogenic Regional Pain Alias Hys-
terical Pain," 145-46
Psychologically induced pain. See Mind-
body interactions
Psychology
behavioral, 77-78, 129
of TMS, 3, 13, 29-58, 72, 142
Psychoneuroimmunology, 148
Psychosomatic Medicine (publication), 64,
135, 136, 138
Psychosomatic medicine. See Mind-
body interactions
Psychotherapy, 35, 104, 153, 179, 182
for fibromyalgia sufferers, 115
public rejection of, 56, 86
and severe emotional disorders, 146
for TMS sufferers, 53, 58, 71, 72,
76, 85-86, 130, 131, 152
Puziss, Norma, 90-91
Radiation, 127
Rage, 49, 53, 130, 135, 141
Rage Within, The (Gaylin), 141
Raineh (witch doctor), 167
Relaxation, 18-19, 123-24, 150
Repressed emotions, 17-20
and decreasing blood flow, 60, 61-
63, 70, 165-66, 177
defined, 30
discussion of, 44-47
Freudian concept of, 134, 141-42
personal relationships and, 39-41,
43,46
physical defenses against, 47-51, 53,
72-77, 79, 96, 144-45
and psychogenic regional pain con-
cept, 146
psychotherapy for, 86
tension generated by, 29-30, 31, 37,
55
and TMS treatment, 78, 82, 96, 131
see also Mind-body interactions; Pain,
secondary gain; Unconscious mind
Resentment, 39, 41, 43, 46, 85
Respiratory infections, 51
Responsibility, sense of, 5, 17, 31, 35,
39-40, 41, 43, 46, 142
Rest, 9, 123
see also Bed rest
Retirement, 26-27
Rosenman, Ray, 32, 150, 152
Rosomoff, Hubert, 101, 126
Rotator cuff disorder, 10
Running, 64, 80, 93
Sargent, Morgan, 58
Scandinavian Journal ofRehabilitative
Medicine, 111
Scandinavian Journal ofRheumatology
62-63
Schnall, Peter L., 150
Schultz, Charles M., 79
Schwartz, A., Ill
Schwartz, Tony, 87, 182
Sciatica, 4, 19, 66, 101, 143, 173, 174
herniated disc association, 15
and oxygen deprivation, 8
see also Nerves, sciatic
Science (journal), 157
Scoliosis, 112-13
Second World War: A Complete History,
The, (Gilbert), 168
Self-esteem. See Low self-esteem; Nar-
cissism
Self-healing, 96, 176
Selye, Hans, 30
Sensory abnormalities, 67-68
see also Numbness and tingling; Pins
and needles
Sensory nerves, 8, 67, 145
Shortwave radiation, 127
Shoulder pain, 6, 8, 25, 26, 42, 48, 50,
51,88,94, 117, 118
common diagnoses, 10, 98
"frozen shoulder," 107-8
see also Bursitis
Siegel, Bernie, 87, 159, 160
Simonton, O. Carl, 159, 160
Sinel, Michael, 87
Sitting, 21-22, 27, 79, 170
Skin disorders, 49, 142, 166
Skinner, B. F., 95-96
Smithsonian (publication), 149
Soft tissue pathology, 48-49, 114-15

192
Index
Spasm, 14, 16, 19, 64, 67, 84, 178,
181
Spastic colon, 49, 62, 142
Spina bifida occulta, 109
Spinal stenosis, 105-6
Spine, 27, 66-67, 90, 174
arthritis of, 109
cervical traction for, 125-26
degenerative changes, 5, 48, 54
medical preoccupation with, 2
nerves, 7-8
structural abnormalities, 99, 109-13
see also Back pain
Spine (publication), 101
Splithoff, C. A., Ill
Spondylolisthesis, 110-11
Spondvlolvsis, 109
Sports,' 12, 17
Sprains and strains, 119
Spurs. See Bone spurs
Squires, Sally, 160-61
Standing in one place, 22, 27
Steroids, 116, 118, 129
Straight leg- raising test, 8-9, 105
Stress, 17-18, 19, 20, 141, 160
examples of, 30-31
hypertension and work- related, 150
Stretching, 81
Structural abnormalities, 3, 23
diagnoses, 97-119
treatments, 124-26
Subconscious mind. See Repressed
emotions; Unconscious mind
Superego, 142
Surgery, 50, 125, 128, 172, 177
"Surgery as a Placebo," 125
Symptomatic treatment, 3
Tachycardia. See Heart palpitation
Tantrums, 44
Temporomandibular joint syndrome
(TMJ), 118
Tendonalgia, 9-11, 67-68, 112, 114
discussion of, 116-17
Tendonitis. See Tendonalgia
Tendons and ligaments, 9-11, 67-68
Tennis elbow, 9, 10
Tension, 43, 47, 61, 179
and pain syndromes, 2, 3, 35, 5
1
and repressed emotions, 29-30, 31,
37,55
Tension headaches, 19, 47, 49, 62, 94,
118, 142
described, 164
Tension Myositis Syndrome (TMS)
common patterns, 11, 23-28, 105
conditioning and, 21-23
definition, 3
diagnosis rejection, 56-57, 88
equivalents of, 11, 49-51, 94, 114-
15, 116-19, 142-44, 150, 162
etiology of, 63
fear and, 52-55, 72, 97-98
and history of tension- related dis-
orders, 47
incidence, 4—5, 57-58
letters from patients, 170-83
manifestation sites, 5-11, 49-51, 75,
94
onset characteristics, 14-20, 23, 24
oxygen deprivation and, 8, 61-68,
70, 82, 127
physical restrictions, 79-80
phvsiology of, 59-69
psychology of, 3, 13, 29-58, 72,
142
psychotherapy for, 85-86
recovery, 35, 71, 81, 87-91
recurrence, 95
as regional process, 7
structural diagnoses vs., 99-119
treatment, 70-96
and treatments, traditional, 120-31
worldwide incidence, 57-58
see also Mind-body interactions
Thorberg, P., 62-63
Tingling feelings. See Numbness and
tingling
Traction, 122, 125-26
Transcutaneous nerve stimulation
(TNS), 123
Transitional vertebra, 109
Treatment, TMS, 70-96
current concepts, 72-76
early history, 70-72
as education program, 83
follow-up surveys, 87-91
group meetings, 83-85
psychotherapy, 85-86
questions about, 91-96
strategies, 77-83

Index
193
Treatments, traditional, 120-31
and chronic pain, 129-31
to combat inflammation, 128-29
to correct structural abnormality,
124-26
discontinuing, 81-82
to increase local circulation of blood,
127-28
placebo effect, 121-22
relaxation, 123-24
to relieve pain, 122-23
rest, 122
to strengthen muscles, 126-27
Trigger points, 65-68
Trochanteric bursitis, 11, 115-16, 167
Type A Behavior and Tour Heart (Fried-
man and Rosenman), 32, 150-51
Type A personality, 32, 150-52
Ulcers
and drugs, 50, 164
emotions and, 163-64
peptic, 3, 49, 50-51, 62, 133, 134,
142, 163, 164
stomach, 45, 47, 50, 94
Ultrasonic radiation, 127
Unconscious mind, 91, 108
characteristics, 33-47
childish elements, 140-41
Freudian concept of, 133-34
and TMS treatment, 77-78, 82, 85,
89, 91, 182
see also Mind-body interactions; Re-
pressed emotions
"Under the Power of the Gran Gadu,"
167
Urinary disorders, 49, 51, 142, 160
Vacation syndrome, 18-20, 40
Vascular system. See Cardiovascular sys-
tem
Vegetative neurosis, 134-35
Vertebra. See Spine
Walking, 22
Walters, Allan, 145-46
Warts, 166
Washington Post Health Journal, 160
Weakness, limb, 7, 27, 61
Weekend-vacation syndrome, 18-20,
40
Wegner, K., 62
Whiplash, 16
Whiton, Louis C, 166-67
Witch doctors, 166-67
Wolfe, Dr., 64
Work obsession, 32, 36, 142
World War II pain studies, 168
Wrist pain, 10, 117

• DO YOU HAVE BACK, NECK, OR SHOULDER PAIN
THAT KEEPS RECURRING OR WONT GO AWAY?
• DO YOU HAVE TO "BABY" YOUR BACK?
• DOES BACK PAIN KEEP YOU FROM LIVING A
FULL LIFE?
1/ so, you may be suffering from TMS—and you don't
have to take it anymore!
Dr. John E. Sarno, author of the revolutionary book Mind Over Back Pain,
is
a medical pioneer whose program has helped thousands of patients overcome
their back conditions — without drugs or dangerous surgery. Now, using his
latest research into TMS (Tension Myositis Syndrome), Dr. Sarno goes one
step further: after identifying stress and other psychological factors in back
pain, he demonstrates how many of his patients have then gone on to heal
themselves without exercise or other physical therapy. Find out:
• Why self-motivated and successful people are prone to TMS
• How anxiety and repressed anger trigger muscle spasms
• How people "train themselves" to experience back pain
• How you may get relief from back pain within two to six weeks
by recognizing TMS and its causes.
With case histories and the results of in-depth mind-body research, Dr. Sarno
describes how patients recognize the emotional roots of their TMS and sever
the connections between mental and physical pain
.
.
. and how,
j ust by reading
this book, you may start recovering from back pain today.
BORDERS PRICE
Dr. JOHN E. SA r
the New York Un
Howard A. Rusk
HEA 4.::..
:
'
-
'
sity Medical Cen ^
SARNO
J
6165
Illnesses
645846? QP
1
120897
UCRP
0446392308
3B
lODIN
U-440-J7LJU-0
">ation Medicine at
*ig physician at the
New York Univer-
9 780446
M 392303